ALSO BY JANE JACOBS

TheDeath andLife ofGreat AmericahCities

TheEconomyQfCities

The QuestionQfSepamtism

Citiesand the WealthQfNatiOhs

SystemsQmei/iual

The Nature ofEconomies

Dark
Age
Ahead

Dark
Age

Ahead

JANEJACOBS

RANDOM HOUSE

Copyright © 2004 byJaneJacobs

All rights reserved under International and Pan—Anierican Copyright

Conventions.Publishedin the United Statesby Random House,an imprint
of The Random House Publishing Group, a division of Random House,
Inc.,

New York.

RANDOMHOUSEand colophon areregisteredtrademarksof Random House,Inc

Grateful acknowledgment
Random House Publishing Group, a division of Random House,

is made to the Modern Library, an imprint of The
Inc., and to

Weidenfeld& Nicolson, a division of The Orion Publishing Group, for

from Islam by Karen Armstrong, copyright ©
permission to reprint an excerpt
2000 by KarenArmstrong. Rights throughout the world, excluding the United
Statesand Canada,arecontrolled by Weidenfeld& Nicolson. Reprinted by
permission of Modern Library, an imprint of The Random House Publishing
Inc., and Weidenfeld & Nicolson, a

Group, a division of Random House,

division of The Orion PublishingGroup.

Library of CongressCataloging—in—PublicationData

Jacobs,Jane.

Dark ageahead/ JaneJacobs.

p.

C111.

Includesindex.

ISBN 1—4000—6232—2

1. Regression (Civilization).
2004

CB19J33

2. Civilization—Philosophy.

I. Title.

901—dc22

2003066680

Printed in the United Statesof America on acid—freepaper

Random House website address: wwwatrandomcom

2

4

6

8

7

5

3

1

First Edition

To

511) ADILMAN

AND

MARTHA SHUTTLEWORTH,

MERRY

LEADING—EDGE

EXPLORERS

CONTENTS

ONE

TWO

THREE

The Hazard 3
FamiliesRigged to Fail 27
Credentialing Versus Educating

44

FOUR

Science Abandoned

64

FIVE

SIX

SEVEN

EIGHT

Dumbed—DownTaxes 102
Self—PolicingSubverted 125
Unwinding Vicious Spirals 139
Dark Age Patterns 161

Notes and Comments

177

Acknowledgments 223
Index

225

Dark
Age
Ahead

CHAPTER

ONE

The Hazard

This is both a gloomy and a hopeful book.

The subjectitself is gloomy.A Dark Age is a culture’sdead
end. We in North America and Western Europe, enjoying
the manybenentsof the cultureconventionallyknown asthe
West, customarily think of a Dark Age as happening once,
long ago,following the collapseof the WesternRoman Em—
pire. But in North America we live in a graveyardof lost abo—
riginal cultures, many of which were decisively nnished off
by massamnesiain which eventhe memory of what waslost
was alsolost. Throughout
the world Dark Ages havescrawled
finis to successionsof cultures receding far into the past.
Whatever happened to the culture whose people produced
the splendid LascauXcavepaintings some seventeenthousand
years ago, in what is now southwestern France? Or the cul—
ture of the buildersof ambitiousstoneandwood hengesin
WesternEuropebeforethe Celtsarrivedwith their Iron Age
technology and intricately knotted art?

4 / DARK AGE AHEAD

Mass amnesia, striking asit is and seemingly weird, is the
least mysterious of Dark Age phenomena. We all understand
the harshprinciple Useit orloseit. A failing or conqueredcul—
ture canspiraldown into a long decline,ashashappenedin
most empires after their relatively short heydays of astonish—
in extreme cases,failing or conquered cul—
ing success.But
tures can be genuinely lost, never to emerge again asliving
ways of being. The salient mystery of Dark Ages setsthe stage
for massamnesia.People living in vigorous cultures typically
treasurethose cultures and resistany threat to them. How and
why can a people so totally discard a formerly vital culture
that it becomes literally lost?

This is a question that haspractical importance for us here
in North America, and possibly in Western Europe aswell.
Dark Ages are instructive, precisely becausethey are extreme
examples of cultural collapse and thus more clear—cutand
vivid than gradual decay.The purpose of this book is to help
our culture avoid sliding into a dead end, by understanding
how such a tragedy comes about, and thereby what can be
done to ward it off and thus retain and further developour
living, functioning culture,which containssomuch of value,
so hard won by our forebears.We need this awarenessbe—
cause,asI plan to explain, we show signsof rushing headlong
into a Dark Age.

Surely,the threat of losing all we have achieved, everything
that makesus the vigorous society we are, cannot apply to us!
How could it possibly happen to us?We have books, magnif—
icent storehousesof knowledge about our culture; we have
pictures,both still and moving, and oceansof other cultural
information that every day wash through the Internet, the
daily press,scholarly journals, the careful catalogsof museum

THE HAZARD / 5

the reports compiled by government bureaucra—

exhibitions,
cies on every subject from judicial decisions to regulations for
earthquake—resistant buildings, and, of course,
time capsules.
Dark Ages, surely,are pre—printingand pre—WorldWide
Webphenomena.EventheRoman classicalworld wasskimpily
documented in comparison with our times. With all our in—
formation,
how could our culture be lost? Or even almost
lost? Don’t we have it aswell preserved aslast season’speach
crop, ready to nourish our descendantsif need be?

Writing, printing, andthe Internet giveafalsesenseof se—

curity about the permanence of culture. Most of the million
details of a complex, living culture are transmitted neither in
writing nor pictorially.Instead,cultureslive through word of
mouth and example. That is why we have cooking classesand
cooking demonstrations,aswell ascookbooks.That is why
we have apprenticeships, internships, student tours, and on—
the—jobtraining aswell asmanuals and textbooks. Every cul—
ture takes pains to educate its young so that they, in their
turn, can practice and transmit it completely. Educators and
mentors, whether
they are parents, elders, or schoolmasters,
use books and videos if
they have them, but they also speak,
and when they are most effective, as teachers, parents, or
mentors, they also serve asexamples.

As recipientsof culture, aswell asits producers,people attend
to countlessnuancesthat are assimilatedonly through experi—
ence. Men, women, and children in Holland conduct them—
selves diEerently from men, women, and children in England,
eventhough both sharethe culture of the West,andvery dif—
ferently from their counterpartsin Turkey,SaudiArabia, or
Singapore.Travelwriters, novelists,visualartists,andphotog—
raphersdraw attention to subtle,everydaydifferencesin conduct

6 / DARK AGE AHEAD

rooted in experience,including the experienceof differing
cultural histories, but
their glossesare unavoidably sketchy,
comparedwith the experienceof living a culture, soakingit
up by example and word of mouth.

Another thing: a living culture is forever changing, with—
out losing itself asa framework and context of change.The
reconstruction of a culture is not the same asits restoration.
In the fifteenth century, scholarsand antiquarianssetabout
reconstructing the lost classicalculture of Greece and Rome
from that culture’swriting andartifacts.Their work wasuse—
ful and remains so to this day; Western Europeans relearned
their cultural derivations from it. But Europeans alsoplunged,
beginning in the fifteenth century, into the post—Renaissance
crises of
the Enlightenment. Profoundly disturbing new
knowledge entered a fundamentalist and feudal framework so
unprepared to receive it that some scientistswere excommu—
nicated and their findings rejected by an establishment that
had managed to accept reconstructed classicism—andused it
to refutenewerknowledge.Copernicus’sstunningproofsforced
educated people to realize that the earth is not the center of
the universe, as reconstructed
classical culture would have it.
This and other discoveries, especially in the basic sciencesof
chemistry and physics, pitted the creative culture of the En—
lightenment againstthe reconstructedculture of the Renais—
sance, which soon stood, ironically, as a barrier to cultural
developmentof the West—abarrier formed by cannedand
preserved knowledge of kinds which we erroneously may
imaginecansaveusfrom future declineor forgetfulness.

Dark Ages are horrible ordeals, incomparably worse than the
temporary amnesiasometimesexperiencedby stunnedsur—

THE HAZARD / 7

firestorms who

vivors of earthquakes, battles, or bombing
abandon customary routines while they searchfor other sur—
vivors, grieve,and grapplewith their own urgent needs,and
who may forget the horrors they havewitnessed,or try to.
But later on, life for survivors continues for the most part as
before, after having been suspendedfor the emergency.

During a Dark Age,

the mass amnesia of survivors be—
comespermanent and profound. The previous way of life
slides into an abyssof forgetfulness, almost as decisively asif
it had not existed. Henri Pirenne, a great twentieth—century
Belgian economic and social historian, saysthat the famous
Dark Agewhich followedthe collapseof theWesternRoman
Empire reachedits nadir somesiXcenturieslater,about 1000
CE.Here, sketchedby two Frenchhistorians,is the predica—
ment of French peasantry in that year:

. . .

The channgof the teeth

The peasants. . . are half starved.The effects of chronic
malnourishment are conspicuous in the skeletons ex—
humed.
indicatesa grass—
eatingpeople,rickets, and an overwhelming preponderance
of people who died young. . . .
Even for the minority that
survivedinfancy,the averagelife spandid not exceedthe age
of forty.
Periodically the lack of food grows worse.For
a year or two there will be a great famine; the chroniclers
describedthe graphic and horrible episodesof this catastroi
phe, complacently and rather excessivelyconjuring up
people who eat dirt and sell human skin.
There is little
or no metal; iron is reservedfor weapons.

. . .

. . .

. . .

Somuch hadbeenforgotten in the forgetful centuries:the
Romans’ use of legumes in crop rotation to restore the soil;

8 / DARK AGE AHEAD

how to mine andsmeltiron andmakeandtransportpicksfor
miners, and hammers and anvils for smiths; how to harvest
honey from hollow—tilehives doubling asgardenfences.In
districts where
clothed, most
peoplewore nlthy rags.

even slaves had been well

Some three centuries after the Roman collapse, bubonic
plague, hitherto unknown in Europe, crept in from North
Africa, where it was endemic, and exploded into the nrst of
many European bubonic plague epidemics. The Four Horse—
men of
the Apocalypse, conventionally depicted asFamine,
War, Pestilence,and Death, had already beenjoined by a nfth
demonic horseman, Forgetfulness.

A Dark Age is not merelya collection of subtractions.It is
not a blank; much is added to nll the vacuum. But the addi—
tions break from the past and themselves reinforce a loss of
the past. In Europe,
languages that derived from formerly
widely understood Latin diverged and became mutually in—
comprehensible. Everyday customs, rituals, and decorations
divergedasold oneswerelost; ethnic awarenessescameto the
fore, often antagonistically; the embryos of nation—stateswere
forming.

Citizenship gaveway to serfdom;old Roman cities and
towns were largely deserted and their underpopulated rem—
nantssankinto poverty and squalor;their former amenities,
such aspublic baths and theatrical performances, became not
even a memory Gladiatorial battles and hungry wild animals
unleashed upon prisoners were forgotten,
too, but here and
there, in backwaters, the memory of combat between a man
on foot and a bull was retained becauseit was practiced. Diets
changed,with gruel displacingbread,and salt nshand wild
fowl almostdisplacingdomesticatedmeat. Rules of inheri—

THE HAZARD / 9

tance and property holding changed. The composition of
householdschanged drasticallywith conversion of Rome’s tra—
ditionalfamily—sizedfarmsto feudalestates.Methodsof warfare
and ostensiblereasonsfor warfare changed asthe stateand its
laws gaveway to exactions and oppressionsby warlords.

Writers disappeared,along with readersand literacy, as
schooling became rare. Religion changed asChristianity,
for—
merly anobscurecult amonghundredsof obscurecults,won
enough adherentsto become dominant and to be accepted as
the statereligion by Constantine,emperorof the still intact
Eastern Roman Empire, and then, alsoasthe statereligion, in
territorial remnantsof the vanishedWestern Empire. The
very definitionsof virtue andthe meaningof life changed.In
WesternChristendom,sexualitybecamehighly suspect.

radical

the most

In sum, during the time of massamnesia,not only was
most classical culture forgotten, and what remained coars—
ened; but also, Western Europe underwent
and thoroughgoing revolution in its recorded history—a po—
litical, economic, social, and ideological revolution that was
unexamined and even largely unnoticed, as such, while it
was under way. In the last desperate years before Western
Rome’s collapse, local governments had been eXpunged by
imperial decree and were replaced by a centralized military
despotism,not aworkableorganfor governmentaljudgments
and renections.

Similar phenomenaare to be found in the obscureDark
Ages that bring defeated aboriginal cultures to a close.Many
subtractionscombine to erasea previous way of life, and
everything changesasa richer past converts to a meager pres—
ent andanalienfuture.During the conquestof North Amer—
ica by Europeans,an estimatedtwenty million aboriginals

IO / DARK AGE AHEAD

succumbed to imported
from lands on which they and their hundreds of different cul—
tures depended.

diseases, warfare, and displacement

Their nrstresponseto the jolts of Europeaninvasionwas
to try to adapt familiar ways of
life to the strange new cir—
cumstances.Some groups that had been accustomed to trad—
ing with one another, for example, forged seemingly workable
trade links with the invaders. But after more conquerors
crowded in, remnants of aboriginal survivors were herded
into isolated reservations.Adaptations of the old cultures be—
came impossible and thus no longer relevant; so, piece by
piece, the old cultures were shed. Some pieces were relin—
quished voluntarily in emulation of the conquerors, or sur—
rendered for
the invaders’ alcohol, guns, and
nour; mostslippedawayfrom disuseandforgetfulness.

the sake of

As in Europe after Rome’s collapse,everything changedfor
aboriginal survivors during the forgetful years: education of
children; religions and rituals; the composition of households
and societies; food; clothing; habitations;
laws and
recognized systemsof ownership and land use;conceptsof jus—
tice, dignity, shame,esteem.Languageschanged,with many
becomingextinct; crafts,skills—everythingwasgone.In sum,
the lives of aboriginals had been revolutionized, mostly by out—
side forcesbut also,to a very minor extent, from within.

recreations;

In the late twentieth century, as some survivors gradually
becameconsciousof how much had been lost, they began
the nfteenth—
behaving much like the scholarly pioneers of
century Italian Renaissancewho searchedfor relics of classi—
cal Greek and Roman culture. Cree and Cherokee, Navajo
andHaidagropedfor fragmentsof lost information by search—
ing out old records and artifacts dispersedin their conquerors’

THE HAZARD /

II

museumsand private collections.Jeeredat by an uncompre—
hending white public of cultural winners, they began impo—
litely demandingthereturn of ancestralarticlesof clothingand
decoration, of musical
the
bonesof their dead,in attemptsto retrievewhat their peoples
and cultures had been like before their lives were transformed
by massamnesiaand unsought revolution.

instruments, of masks, even of

When the abyssof lost memory by a people becomes too
deep and too old, attempts to plumb it are futile. The Ainu,
Caucasianaborigines of Japan, have a known modern history
similar in some ways to that of North American aboriginals.
Centuriesbefore the Europeaninvasionof North America,
the Ainu lost their foragingterritoriesto invadingancestorsof
the modernJapanese.Survivingremnantsof Ainu weresettled
in isolated reservations,most on Hokkaido, Japan’snorthern—
most island,where they still live. The Ainu remain a mysterious
people, to themselvesaswell asto others. Physical characteris—
tics proclaim their European ancestry; they may be related to
Norsepeoples.But wherein Europethey camefrom canonly
be conjectured. They retain no information about their loca—
tions or cultures there, nor by what route they reachedJapan,
nor why they traveledthere.(Seenote,p. 179.)

Cultures that triumphed in unequal contests between con—
quering invaders and their victims have been meticulously
analyzed by a brilliant
twenty—first—centuryhistorian and sci—
entist, Jared Diamond, who has explained his analyses in a
splendidlyaccessiblebook, Gum,Germs,andSteel.He writes
that he began his exploration with a question put to him by a
youth in New Guinea,askingwhy EuropeansandAmericans
were successfuland rich. The advantagesthat Diamond

12 / DARK AGE AHEAD

exploredandthe patternshe tracesilluminate all instancesof
cultural wipeout.

Diamond arguespersuasivelythat the differencebetween
conqueringand victim culturesis not owing to geneticdis—
crepanciesin intelligence or other inborn personalabilities
amongpeoples,asracistspersistin believing.He holds that,
apart nom variations in resistanceto various diseases,the fates
of cultures are not genetically innuenced, let alone deter—
mined. But, he writes, successful invaders and conquerors have
historicallypossessedcertain crucial advantagesconferredon
them long ago by the luck of what he callsbiogeography.The
cultural ancestorsof winners, he says,got head startsas out—
standinglyproductivefarmersand herders,producing ample
and varied foods that could support large and dense popu—
lations.

Large and densepopulations—in a word, cities—were able
to support individuals and institutions engagedin activities
other than direct food production. For example, such soci—
eties could support specialistsin tool manufacturing, pottery
making,boatbuilding,andbarter,could organizeandenforce
legal codes, and could create priesthoods for celebrating and
spreadingreligions, specialistsfor keeping accounts, and
armed forces for defenseand aggression.

Diamond’s identifications of basic causesof discrepancies
in power among cultures boil down to good or bad geo—
graphicalluck. His resulting causesboil down to size and
density of populations and consequent differences in techno—
logical andorganizationalspecialization.All thesefactorscan
be quantified.

This analysisworked so well

for explaining the historical
outcomes of connicts that ranged over all the continents, and

THE HAZARD / 13

alsoon islandsextending from the Arctic to the South Pacinc,
that Diamond hoped he had created the foundation for a
genuine science of human history—a true, hard science, based
on factsassolidandmeasurableasthoseunderlyingphysicsor
chemistry, and as reliable for predicting future outcomes of
connict. It seemed to him that only a couple of
loose ends
needed tying.

One such was how cultures lost their memories. This was
not hard for Diamond to explain asa consequenceof Useit or
loseit. He took asa vivid example the Tasmanians,who were
nearly exterminated by invading Europeans in the nineteenth
century They werethe mosttechnologicallyprimitive people
to be recordedin modern history.They hadno way of mak—
ing nre, no boomerangsor spearthrowers, no specialized
stone tools, no canoes,no sewing needles, no ways of catch—
ing fish. Yet their parent culture, on the Australian mainland,
had all thesetechnologies. Presumablythe Tasmaniansdid too,
some ten thousand years previously, when they populated
their island by traveling from the mainland over a prehistoric
land bridge.Diamond remarksthat a culture canlosea given
technology for many reasons.Perhapsa certain raw material is
in short supply;perhapsall the skilledartisansin a generation
meet with tragedy.Whenever the Tasmanianslost an element
of their culture, the losswould have been temporary had they
still been in communication
with the mainland, but because
they were not, eachloss became permanent.

threatened

The second loose end, however,

to unravel
Diamond’s whole fabric, as he recognized. According to his
analyses,China and Mesopotamia, both of which had early
and long leads over European cultures, should have securely
maintained thoseleads,but did not. While neither experienced

14 / DARK AGE AHEAD

the extreme of a Dark Age, both succumbed to long declines,
insidiously growing poverty, and backwardnessrelative to Eu—
rope.They inform us,asdo the unedifyingterminationsof all
greatempiresin thepast,thatstrongandsuccessfulculturescan
fail. The differencebetweenthesefailuresandthoseof con—
quered aboriginal cultures is that the death or the stagnated
moribundity of formerly unassailableand vigorous cultures is
causednot by assaultfrom outside but by assaultfrom within,
that is, by internal rot in the form of
fatal cultural turnings,
not recognizedaswrong turnings while they occur or soon
enough afterward to be correctable. Time during which cor—
rectionscanbe maderuns out becauseof massforgetfulness.
Mesopotamia,the so—calledFertile Crescentof the Tigris
and Euphrates rivers—traditionally thought
to be the site of
the biblical Gardenof Eden—in historicaltimeshascentered
on the fabled city of Baghdad. For some nine thousand years,
startingin about 8500 B.C.E.,almosteverymajor innovation
adopted in ancient Europe had originated in or very near the
Fertile Crescent: grain cultivation; writing;
brickmaking,
the wheel; weaving;
masonry engineering, and construction;
pottery making; irrigation. Just as Diamond’s attempted sci—
ence of human history would predict, the Fertile Crescent
was the seat of
the ancient world’s earliest empires: Sumer,
Babylon,Assyria.

Yet with all its seemingly unbeatable advantages,something
went so wrong in the Fertile Crescent
says,
is now absurd to couple “Fertile Crescent” with “world
it
leader in food production. Today’s ephemeral wealth[,]
. ..
based on the single non—renewableresource of oil, conceals
the region’slong—standingfundamentalpoverty anddifficulty
feedingitself.”

that, as Diamond

THE HAZARD / 15

Diamond askedhimself how so gifted a region could lose
its early, long lead over Europe. By 115 C.E.,Mesopotamia
had been conquered by Rome and becamea Roman province.
This wasno temporarysetback.Over the courseof the neXt
eighteen centuries, the region was passedaround from in—
vader to invader, eventually falling into the hands of
the
British Empire and Western oil corporations; a new chapter,
of connictsover oil, is not yet finished.

Diamond saysthe lead was lost through environmental

ig—

In ancient

times, much of

the Fertile Crescent and
norance.
eastern Mediterranean was covered with forests. But
to ob—
tain more farmland and more timber, and to satisfythe plas—
ter industry’srelentlessdemandsfor wood fuel, the forests
were cut faster than they could regenerate. Denuded valleys
siltedup, and intensifiedirrigation led to saltaccumulations
in the soil. Overgrazing by goats, allowing new growth no
start in life, sealedthe destruction. The damage had become
irreversible, Diamond says,by 400 B.C.E.What escapedearlier
has been done in recently: “The last forests
in modern
Jordan
. . . were felled by Ottoman Turks during railroad
constructionjust beforeWorld War 1.”Most of the lastwet—
lands, the great reed marshesof southern Iraq, with their
complex
insects, birds, and
human beings,too—the “Marsh Arabs” who had occupied
these lands for some five thousand years—fell to a drainage
scheme undertaken for political
reasonsby Saddam Hussein
in the 1990s, creating another barren, salt—encrusted desert.

of plants, mammals,

ecology

. . .

then surpassed it, says Diamond,

Northern and Western Europe pulled abreastof Mesopo—
“not because [Euro—
tamia,
peans] havebeen wiser but becausethey had the good luck to
live in a more robust environment with higher rainfall,
in

16 / DARK AGE AHEAD

which vegetationgrowsquickly.”Also,they herdedcowsand
sheep,not goats.

The Fertile Crescent, along with the restof the Middle East,

reassertedits creativelead—notin food production but in sci—
ence—during the triumphs of the Islamic empires. Islam was
religious, and cultural
the most successful political, military,
entity of its time, assertingdominance from the eighth to the
nfteenthcenturies,westwardthrough North Africa andSpain,
eastwardto South Asia. So far aheadof Europe was the scien—
tinc knowledgeof Islamthatmostscientincandliteraryworks
from the classicalperiod which Renaissance scholars nnally
obtained had been translated from Greek and Latin into Ara—
Islamic scholars later retranslated these texts into Latin for
bic;
scholars in European Christendom. During this period, our
ancestralEuropean culture alsoobtained from Islam the nimble
signsthat we still call Arabic numerals, and that are indispens—
able to our mathematics and all the achievements of measur—
ing and reasoning that mathematics hasmade possible.Arabic
numeralsoriginated in the Fertile Crescentand India; the
sourceof their most original and portentous addition, the zero,
was the Fertile Crescent. The nrst known European mathe—
maticaluseof the zerowasin a Spanishmanuscriptdated976
CE. and believed to be derived from a Latin translation of a
Baghdad work.

Although Diamond does not go into the second cultural
deadening of the Fertile Crescent that brought to an end the
second burst of world—altering scientinc creativity there, an—
other scholar,KarenArmstrong,hasidentinedthepoint of no
return as1492,theyearFerdinandandIsabelladrovetheMus—
lims from Spain—theirlastimportant Europeanfoothold—in
determination to eXpunge from their realm Muslims, Jews,

THE HAZARD / 17

heretics, and other

Christian
start of the nineteenth century, Mesopotamia deliberately at—
temptedto shielditself from innuencescomingfrom the out—
sideworld.

infidels. From then until

the

Cultural xenophobia is a frequent sequel to a society’s de—
cline from cultural vigor. Someone has aptly called self—
imposed isolation a fortress mentality. Armstrong describesit
asa shift nom faith in logos,reason,with its future—oriented
spirit, “always
. . .
areasof competenceand control of the environment,” to
mythos,meaning conservatism that looks backward to funda—
mentalist beliefs for guidance and a worldview

seeking to know more and to extend

. . .

A fortress or fundamentalist mentality not only shuts itself
off nom dynamic innuences originating outside but also, asa
side effect, ceasesinnuencing the outside world. Fortunately
for our own culture, before Mesopotamia succeededin entirely
sealingitself off, someof its talentedandopen—mindedscien—
tists ned to northern Italy, where they joined Galileo, Vesalius,
and other precursorsof the Enlightenment,who had their
own hard battles to fight againstspiritual and intellectual fun—
damentalism.Mesopotamianscientistshelpedmakethe Uni—
versity of Padua a preeminent world center of reason when
our own ancestralculture needed rescue from the stultifying
ideasthat all valuablethought had alreadybeenthought and
that disturbing new ideas—for example, that the earth is eons
older than mythosadmits—are unnecessaryor dangerous.

China had much the same original advantagesasthe Fer—
tile Crescent,plus greaterrainfall, and retainedits earlylead
longer. The large and densepopulation of medievalChina
enabledit to becomethe world leaderin technology.Among
its many innovations were castiron, the compass,gunpowder,

18 / DARK AGE AHEAD

decades before Columbus

paper, printing with movable type, windmills, navigation
equipment of all kinds, paper money, porcelain, and unparal—
leled silk spinning,weaving,anddyeing.China ruled the seas
in the early nfteenth century. It sent vast numbers of cargo
ships,calledtreasureneets,acrossthe Indian Oceanto the east
coast of Africa,
crossed the At—
lantic. The treasureneetsconsisted of hundreds of ships, each
asmuch asfour hundred feet long. A neet was manned by as
many astwenty—eight thousand sailors. Centuries before the
British Royal Navy learnedto combatscurvywith rationsof
lime juice on long seavoyages, the Chinese had solved that
problem by supplying shipswith ordinary dried beans,which
were moistened asneeded to make bean sprouts, a rich source
of vitamin C.

Diamond askedhimself why Chinese ships didn’t colonize
Europe before Vasco da Gama’s three little Portuguese ships
launchedEurope’scolonizationof EastAsia.“Why didn’t Chi—
nese ships
colonize America’s west coast?Why did China
loseits technologicalleadto formerly sobackwardEurope?”
like

In this case,the turning point was almost whimsical,

. . .

the plot of a musical or an Operetta.In the early nfteenth cen—
tury, a political power strugglewaswagedbetweentwo fac—
tions in the Chinese imperial bureaucracy.The losing faction
had championed treasure neetsand taken an interest in their
leadership and well—being.The winning faction assertedits
successby abruptly calling a halt to voyages,forbidding fur—
ther ocean voyaging, and dismantling shipyards.

In the complex Chinese culture, the loss of the great ship—
yardsmusthavereverberatedthrough the economy,affecting
many other activities;so did the lossof the far—nungimport
andexport trade.In 1433,with a capriciouspolicy emerging
from a tempest in a teapot, China’s long stagnation began.A

THE HAZARD / 19

deeper cause than the court
intrigue, Diamond points out,
wasthat China wasso tightly unined politically that “one deci—
sion stopped neetsover the whole of China.” He contraststhis
with Columbus’s potential opportunities for sponsorship.After
Columbuswasturned down by the Duke of Anjou, andthen
in successionby the King of Portugal, the Duke of Medina—
Sedona,and the Count of Meda—Celi,he nnally hit the jack—
pot with Isabellaand Ferdinandof Spain.Europe’spolitical
nagmentation and its therefore decentralized decision making
afforded crucial opportunities to Columbus and other explor—
ers that were denied to mariners of the richer and more ad—
vancedChinese.Unity, like manygoodthings,is goodonly in
moderation. The samecan be said of disunity In 1477, when
a Chinese attempt was made to revive intercontinental ocean
trading,the vice presidentof the War Ministry not only for—
bade it but destroyed all the documents regarding previous
trading voyages.He called them “deceitful exaggerations of
bizarre things, far removed from the testimony of people’s
eyesandears,”and saidthe shipshad brought home nothing
but “betel, bamboostaves,grapewine, pomegranates,ostrich
eggsand such like odd things.” Lossof charts and recordsfrom
the archives ended medieval China’s interest in the outside
world, aswell asthe period of exploration.

China’swrong turning, capriciousthough it was,carried
the double blow of surrender of its technological
lead and si—
multaneousretreatinto a fortressmentality.In China’scase,
the mythosfor which logoswas surrendered was Confucian—
ism, an intellectual and social bequest from a sage of
the
long—distantpastwhich wasbelievedto contain all necessary
precepts for the conduct of human beings in their relation—
shipswith one another and with their environment.

Diamond’s analysisof winners and losers, elegantly precise

20 / DARK AGE AHEAD

andpredictablewherevertheforcesatwork weregeography,cli—
mate, plants, animals,microorganisms,and demography,turned
mushy and unreliable assoon ashuman decisions entered the
equation. Yet, ashe himself was the first to admit, a scienceof
humanhistory that omits the behaviorof humanbeingsis an
absurdity. His brilliant analysis,asis, explains most outcomes
of unequal contestsbetween cultural winners and losers.But I
think he limited its explanatory power unnecessarily by the
way he posed his initial question: What arethe advantagesthat
enableculturalconquerorsto win conflictswith losers?

Supposewe turn the question upside down and ask: What
doomslosers?The answerto the new question, castin the form
of a principle, runs somethinglike this: Losersareconfronted
with suchradicaljolts in circumstancesthat their institutionscannot
adaptadequately,becomeirrelevant,andaredropped.This principle
leavesscopefor changesandjolts that arisewithin a culture, as
well aschangesandjolts imposed from outside.

A common example of a change imposed from the outside
is the seizureby a conquerorof a hunting society’sterritory
As a consequence, both the practice and lore of successful
hunting islostfrom thosecultures.The oldestresidentof Fort
Yukon, aman of aboutseventyin apredominantlyAmerican
Indian community within the Arctic Circle, explained in
1994,“Our young fellowsget me to tell them aboutthe old
hunting life. They think it would be so wonderful and excit—
ing to follow it againinsteadof the dull jobs the schooltries
to prepare them for. But
they don’t realize how hard and
chancy hunting was. They don’t know enough to survive in
the bush.”

An exampleof ajolt nom within is the overfishingof cod
that has idled fishermen in Newfoundland villages.Some

THE HAZARD / 21

nshermen adapt by overfishing other groundfish and crabs,
some by taking jobs in factories (almost always short—lived
enterpriseslured in and subsidizedby the province);many,if
they are young, emigrate to cities elsewhere in Canada; and
others temporize and live on hopes that wealth from offshore
oil drilling will
trickle down to them in time. How to fish for
the nsh stocks don’t
cod is not forgotten yet, but it will be if
recover soon,which they show no sign of doing after a decade—
long moratorium.

Jolts from inside and outside are not basicallydifferent.
What is lost from Diamond’s erstwhile science of human his—
tory when we factor in human decisions is the aim he had of
creating a genuinely hard science. Bringing in human deci—
sions, as he did and as we must, changes the science itself,
from a hard science to a soft one.

Some people think optimistically that if
things get bad
enough, they will get better becauseof the reaction of benef—
icent pendulums.When a culture is working wholesomely,
beneficentpendulum swings—effectivefeedback—dooccur.
Corrective stabilization is one of the great servicesof democ—
racy, with its feedback to rulers from the protesting and vot—
ing public. Stabilization is also one of
the great services of
some commercial
in concert with mar—
kets, shift production and consumption away from resources
plagued by the high costs of diminishing returns, to substi—
tutes or to other locales of production.

innovations which,

But powerful persons and groups that find it in their inter—
estto prevent adaptive corrections have many ways of thwart—
ing self—organizingstabilizers—throughdeliberatelycontrived
subsidiesandmonopolies,for example.Or circumstancesmay

22 / DARK AGE AHEAD

haveallowedculturaldestructionto drift to apoint wherethe
jolts of correction appear more menacing than downward
drift. Gibbon’s Decline and Fall of theRomanEmpire is stuffed
with instancesof drift that becamemonstrousandultimately
proved impossible to correct. For instance, asshortfalls in the
Roman treasury—whichhad their own economic causes—
made it impossible to pay Rome’s legions adequately and on
time, eliteguardunitstook into their own handsthe powerof
choosing emperors in hopes of ensuring their own well—
being. This made a shamblesof orderly government successions
and policies, including budgets for supporting the legions—
a shamblesthat with time grew worse, not better. In the half
centuryfrom 235 C.E.to 284 C.E.,Rome hadtwenty—sixarmy—
acclaimed emperors, who, with only one exception, suc—
cumbedto public assassinationsor private murders.Rome’s
other major institutions, such asthe Senate and the empire’s
diplomatic structures,were implicated in this bizarre se—
quence, either through their own corruption or by pernicious
drifts of their own.

The human causesof Rome’s collapse have been studied
minutely, and one thing that can be learned is that everything
is connected with everything else, not only in its conse—
quencesbut alsoin its causes.We may be sure that the story of
the desertification of the Fertile Crescent, cited by Diamond,
was not simple. At the least, corrective adaptation that would
havethreatened the plaster industry (which was sovoraciously
consuming forests for
fuel) and would have handicapped
goatherding and its dependent industries must have appeared,
atthe time, to belessfeasiblethan continuing to ruin the land
itself

In the case of China’s self—imposedstagnation as a by—

THE HAZARD / 23

product of political squabbling, we must bring in the usual
complicating fact that everything was connected to every—
thing else,and addthe reality I mentioned earlier:that even
in a literate and archive—keepingsociety, which medieval
China was, time for corrective action is nnite: culture resides
mainly in people’sheadsandin the examplespeopleset,and
is subject therefore to natural mortality. Thousands of details
of shipbuilding,equipping, navigating,and trading practices
into the complicated creation, nnance, and
obviously went
treasure neets.As the people who had compe—
operation of
tently maintained this organizational wonder died off, so
must have cultural competence to follow in their footsteps.

People get used to losses(fortunately, or life would be un—
bearable)and take absencesfor granted. So it must havebeen,
eventually, with Chinese ocean voyages.In North America, a
couple of decadesago, it was common to hear residents re—
mark, asthey lockedup for ashortdeparturefrom home,that
they never used to need to lock their doors. Nowadays, the
remark is seldom heard. People who once didn’t need to lock
their doors have gradually died off, and so even the memory
of what has been lost is now almost lost. As for reconstitut—
ing that particular security, what with everything connecting
to everything else—the illegal drug trade, police corruption,
racism,poverty,andinadequateeducation—theftandrobbery
are so intractably complex asto defy solution. The only rea—
son I know that unlocked—door security is actually possible
(although my mother used to frequently comment about for—
merly not havingto lock the door) is that I haveexperienced
unlocked security, with amazement, during a visit to Tokyo,
Kyoto, and Osaka in 1972.

The collapseof one sustainingculturalinstitution enfeebles

24 / DARK AGE AHEAD

others,makingit more likely that otherswill give way With
eachcollapse,still further ruin becomesmore likely, until nnally
the whole enfeebled, intractable contraption crashes.Benen—
centcorrectionsof deteriorationarenot guaranteed.

A culture is unsalvageableif stabilizingforcesthemselvesbe—
come ruined and irrelevant. This is what I fear for our own
culture, and why I havewritten this cautionary book in hope—
ful expectation that time remains for corrective actions. Each
correction benentsothers, making connectionswithin the
culture benencial instead of malignant.

In the nve chapters that follow,

I single out nve pillars of
our culture that we depend on to stand nrm, and discusswhat
seem to me ominous signsof their decay.They are in process
of becoming irrelevant, and so are dangerously close to the
lost memory and cultural uselessness.These nve
brink of
jeopardized pillars are

0 community and family (the two are so tightly con—

nected they cannot be consideredseparately)

0 higher education
- the effectivepracticeof scienceandscience—basedtech—
nology (again, so tightly connected they cannot be
consideredseparately)

- taxesand governmental powers directly in touch with

needsand possibilities

' self—policingby the learned professions.

It may seemsurprising that I do not single out such failings
as racism, pronigate environmental destruction, crime, vot—
ers’ distrust of politicians and thus low turnouts for elections,

THE HAZARD / 25

those nve, rather

than

of

the middle class. Why not

andthe enlarginggulf betweenrich andpoor alongwith at—
trition
the nve I have selected to concentrate upon? Surely the sec—
ond nve indicate seriouscultural dysfunction. Perhapsmy
is wrong, but I think these second nve are symp—
judgment
toms of breakdown in the nve I have chosen to discuss.Fur—
thermore, many North Americans are already awareof them
asdangerous nawsand are trying to focus on intelligent cor—
rections.

The weaknessesI singleout in the nvepillars arelessrec—
ognized, I think. These pillars are crucial to the culture and
are insidiously decaying. Other institutions may be asdeserv—
ing of alarmed attention. Hindsight may well expose my
blind spots.Indeed, it surely will
if we continue drifting,
heedlessof our culture’swell—being.I canonly apologizefor
being lessomniscient than I should be asI take up a respon—
sibility—which I hopereaderswill alsoassume—fortrying to
do the small bit I can to give stabilizing corrections a push. A
culture is a vast and obdurate entity, difncult to divert from a
mistakencourseupon which it hasset.Following my discus—
sion of the decayof the nvecultural pillars,I attemptpracti—
cal suggestionsfor reversing some intractable deteriorations.

My last chapter returns to patterns of Dark Ages and less
extreme deteriorations,and puts them into larger context
than our own vexations. It also suggestswhy our predica—
ment—the shift to postagrarianism—issojolting that if our
culture and our contemporaries’ pull through more or lessin—
tact, we will all deserveposterity’s gratitude.

Although the chaptersthat follow arestructuredasa col—
lection of warnings, this book should not be mistakenfor
prophecy. Life is full of surprises—some of them good, with

26 / DARK AGE AHEAD

large, benencial, totally unforeseen consequences.Prophecy
is for people too ignorant of history to be aware of that, or
for Charlatans.However,by dennition, we can’trely on sur—
priserescues;mostlywe mustlie in the bedswe makeon the
mattressesour culture provides.

One aspectof luck is that companion cultures can be res—

cued by one another, in part by welcoming exiles and their
ways. This has often happened. I have already given some eX—
amples of the remarkable aid given our ancestralculture cen—
turies ago by the culture of Mesopotamia, of all places,when
it was already deeply in trouble itself. In the following siX
chapters I have connned my analysisto North America be—
causethat is the culture I know best. However, its direct an—
cestralculture is that of WesternEurope, which hasmany
branchesother than the North American offshoot.Among
the disturbing phenomena I observeis that the sameills beset—
ting the United Statesand Canada menace other branches of
the West, if not yet asacutely Maybe the most useful service
of the cautions that follow is to alert societiesthat supposethey
havean exemplarymodel in America;they would do well to
pause,be wary, and sift carenilly,discriminating between much
that is constructiveandvigorous,or atworst merelynoveland
harmless,and much that is destructive and deadening.

CHAPTER

TWO

Families Rigged to Fail

You probably know them personally, but in any caseyou’ve
seenthem in a thousand advertisements:the father, the mother,
the little boy, and his older sister,alighting from their new car
atthe charmingsmall—townchurch;or smiling athomeasthe
mother,equippedwith asquirtbottle of detergentandaplas—
tic sponge,Whisksawaythe stainsof spillages,everythingre—
storedshiny asnew.Sometimes,for the approvalof women
customers, the father does the magic cleanup.

This is the nuclear family: a biological unit. With such
minor modifications as a third generation rather than only
two, or the inclusion of grown children—unclesandaunts—
ascollateral and probably temporary members, this unit stands,
and has long stood, as the ur—unit of culture, whether rich,
like the onein the paragraphabove,or poor, like the family of
a serf.

The nuclear family has traditionally been expected by its

28 / DARK AGE AHEAD

the other elementary microcosm

own members and by others to fulnll, also, the functions of a
household. The household,
of culture, is an economic unit. It provides its members,
whoever they may be, with material necessitiesof life: food,
clothing, shelter, and, if need be, transportation and deter—
gents. The two units, one biological,
commonly overlap but are not necessarilythe same.

the other economic,

enormous

varieties

concubines;

of members:

We might, ofnaand,expect families to have been the more
successfulof the two at adapting to change—after all, biology
is more basic than economy. But it has been usual for house—
holds to be more adaptable and resilient than families when
subjected to stressesand jolts, while at the same time main—
tainingtheir elementaryfunctions.This world containshouse—
holds with
apprenticesand other students;roomers and boarders;all man—
ner of servants,from governessesand tutors to scullery maids
andpages.Our modern culturestill includesnumeroushouse—
holds of types that proliferated wildly during the disorder of
the Dark Age afterWesternRome’scollapse.Monasteriesand
conventsarenonfamily,evenantifamilyhouseholds,constitu—
tionally disconnected from the biological unit. A few huge
feudal householdsremain in Europe, embracingboth rich
and poor biological
families, but immensely more effective as
economic than asbiological units. Monasteries and, to a lesser
extent, convents have been resourceful and varied in devising
meansfor meetinghouseholdexpenses.Their offshoothouse—
holds haveincluded boarding schoolsand orphanages.Onshoot
households of parishes have been poorhouses, workhouses,
and earlyhospitals.Most standingarmies,from their begin—
ning, haveincorporated messhalls, uniforms, and barracks
for nonofficer ranks. To venture a generalization: households,

FAMILIES

RIGGED

TO FAIL

/

29

adaptableasthey are, take over functions that families are at a
loss to fill.

While politicians, clergy, creators of advertisements, and
other worthies assertstoutlythat the family is the foundation
of society,the nuclear family, asan institution,
is currently in
grave trouble. Almost half of marriages—morein some
places—end in divorce, in Canada after an averageduration of
13.7 years, not long enough to rear children to adulthood.*
Increasingly marriage is bypassedaltogether or postponed into
early middle age,a major reason,demographerssay,for re—
duced birthrates.

Although high divorceratescut acrossall incomeclasses,as
do drug abuse,juvenile delinquency, and spouseabuse,a brief
discussionof family finances is the speediestway of acknowl—
edging the frequent gapbetween what is expected of a family—
household, and the meansof fulfilling expectations.

that half of whatever

For almost forty years, starting in the mid—and late 1930s,
the median income of an American or Canadian family was
sunicient to cover the mortgage costs of a median—priced
houseor the rent of a median—pricedapartment.“Median”
means, statistically,
is being measured
fallsbelow the median,and half above.But at somepoint in
the 19705,the two figures—median shelter cost and median
income—slipped seriously out of whack. The disconnection
showed up clearly in the Canadian censusof 1981. At about
the sametime, US. economicstatisticsshowedthat the pur—
chaseof a “median” house required an income that only 10

*A poorly conceived statistic.Common knowledge tells us that it must be
compounded from a large number of very short marriages (two to five years
long) and a smaller number of
twenty years
long).

lasting marriages (upwards of

30 / DARK AGE AHEAD

families could claim. Ninety percent could no
percent of
took only two
longer afford to buy a “median” house. It
people to produce children, but on averagetwo by themselves
could no longer afford to purchase or rent shelter for them.

The gapjolted renters,thosewho hadnot bought a house
during the time when incomes and shelter costs corre—
sponded more closely.In the yearsthat followed, renters spent
increasinglyhigh proportions of their incomeson shelter,to
the point
that, for many, at least half their income was con—
sumedby rent, leavingtoo little for everythingelse.A similar
discrepancy showed up in England.

Homeless people who slept on the street or found minimal
shelterin doorways,underbridges,or in shantiescontrivedof
tarpaulinsand cardboardtendedto be singleandwere often
afnictedwith multiple health or other problems.The poor
and disabled are always the first to alert us to social break—
downs. If their plight worsens or their numbers increase,it is
prudent
for cushioned members of a culture to take notice.
In a Canadianmagazinearticlepublishedin 1984andabook
published the sameyear, I drew attention to an alarming gap
betweenthe costof shelterand income.I receivedonly one
bit of economic feedback. It was from the director of a neo—
conservative economic think tank in Vancouver. He took eX—
ception to my statement that “a condition formerly normal
only in poor parts of the United Stateshad become normal
for the nation.” He replied to the editor of the magazine,as
follows:

Now, the fact is that nearly all of the housesin the United
Statesare occupied. Since only ten percent of the popu—
lation can, apparently, afford housing, this implies that

FAMILIES

RIGGED

TO FAIL

/

3I

ninety percent of those who own housing in the United
Statescannot afford to do so.An obviously ridiculous situ—
ation. What Jacobsdoesnot point out is that those rising
house prices over the past severaldecadeshave also en—
hanced the wealth of home owners in the United States,
most of whom areliving in their most signincantmaterial
is a simple arithmetic fact that the moment at
asset.It
which the median family in the United Statescannot af—
ford to purchasethe median—pricedhouse,the price of the
median house will begin to fall. Provided, only, of course,
that in calculating income we do not ignore the implicit
income from most families’ most important asset.

If

this meansanything, it must mean that the innated
wealthof thosewho alreadyown housescancelsthe plight of
families priced out of the market. In one sense,something like
that hashappened from the viewpoint of the economy taken
as a whole.
In Toronto, home ownership rates have increased,
rising to a record 61.5 percent of homes occupied by owners
in 2002, compared with 54 percent in 2000, even though av—
eragehouseprices increasedabout 7 percent a year.The secret
is low innation rates (with the exception of house prices),
which permit
low mortgage and other borrowing rates. As
prices of housesand condominiums rise, owners can contin—
ually borrow more against the rising value of these assets.In
Canada,
to household income are
thus at record high levels.

ratios of household debt

The miracle of money growing on houses operates even
more potently in the United States,where mortgageinterest
is deductible from income tax and where purchasesof resale
housesreachedrecordhigh levelsin 2002,astheir pricesrose

32 / DARK AGE AHEAD

to record high levels and mortgage interest ratesfell to record
low levels. Perhaps the conservative think—tank economist
quoted aboveforesaw and welcomed this bubble. It will burst,
either if other rising prices signincantly push up innation
rates, or else if house—price innation
rates, hence also interest
that in this case me—
slows, halts, or retreats. The critic is right
dian incomes and median house and condominium prices
will onceagaincoincidemore closely.

This has not, however, canceled or even easedthe plight
of
renters. Houses with ever higher prices do not
trickle
down to them. In the years since 1995, not only have the
numbers of homeless in Toronto
increased but also, as a
new generation of poor young families has appeared, the
homeless have come to include families who are crowded
into a motel room or broken up so members can qualify for
dormitory—type public shelters. Families on welfare and the
“working poor,” subsisting on low wages that often approx—
imate welfare incomes, are of course worst off. They scrape
by, when weekly income runs out sooner than the days of
the week, by using charitablefood banksand by borrowing
either food or money from family and friends. Familiesof
two in Toronto who usefood banksspendan averageof 67
percent of
four, 70 per—
income
cent. This typically left
in early 2003, with only
about $3.65 Canadian (about $2.40 U.S.) a day per person
to cover food, clothing,
personal care, school
supplies, and all other expenses. On average, among food—
bank users,18percentof children and 39 percentof parents
go hungry at least once a week in single—parentfamilies
with one child, and 45 percent of children and 47 percent
of parents do in families with five members. Nevertheless,

on rent;
them,

transportation,

their

families of

FAMILIES RIGGED TO FAIL / 33

rent paymentsare given nrst priority, to fend off the disas—
ter of homelessness.

In North America, a high proportion of home ownership
was made possible by long—term mortgages at relatively low
interest rates guaranteed by the central governments of
the
United Statesand Canada.For those too poor to benent from
ownership programs, both governments underwrote subsi—
dized housing, called public housingin the United Statesand
assistedhousingin Canada. Both public and assistedhousing
were badly planned and autocraticallyand badly run. They
were not popular with either taxpayers or tenants. But after
theseprogramswere eventually halted or much curtailed,
which happensto unpopularprograms,waiting listsfor spaces
grew. In 2002 in Toronto, about 65,000 low—income people
were on assisted—housingwaiting lists. For nonpront co—ops,
the averagewait was nve years.

The otherpart of the shelterequation,the medianincomes
of
families, gradually grew as larger numbers of wives and
mothers took paying jobs. Of course, a nuclear family’s nrst
responseto the radicaldisconnectionbetweenshelterprices
and a modest income is to try to make do somehow, short of
becoming homeless: cut expenses,nnd no—costrecreations,
take in friends caught in similar difnculties (enlargethe house—
hold), procure abortions (limit
the household), patronize sec—
ondhand storesand yard sales,sell possessionsthey themselves
can spare, and hound governments to hunt down missing
fathers who have defaulted on court—ordered child—support
payments.

These strategies helped—but

the
sametime, necessaryhousehold expensestended to grow, and
not merely becauseof innation but becausequalitative changes

not much, because, at

34 / DARK AGE AHEAD

had occurred in what constituted necessaryexpenses.The
most serious and widespread increasewas the need for an au—
tomobile. Public transportationdeclined or was altogether
absent, especially in suburbs. In cities that underwent urban
renewal
in the 1950s and later and in new suburbs, stores and
working placeswere segregatedfrom residences,without fea—
sible, much lessenjoyable, walking or bicycling routes.By the
mid—1960s,simply to get to ajob, or to find ajob in the first
place, or to buy provisions, or to get a child to school or a
playgroundor a playmate,a car becamea necessityFamilies
needed child carewhile parentswere at work and commuting,
sonom 1970on, parentsfollowedup leadsandchasedaround
to find the limited numbers of subsidized placesfor children
that they could both affordand get to. Inhumanelylong car—
commutesto work becamecommon enough by 2002 that
Canadian police recognized driver drowsiness to be jostling
drunken driving asa causeof fatal highway accidents.

Two parents, to saynothing of one, cannot possibly satisfyall
the needsof a family—household.A community is neededas
well,
for raising children, and also to keep adults reasonably
saneandcheerful.A community is a complex organismwith
complicated resourcesthat grow gradually and organically Its
resourcesfall into three main categories.

First,

richest, and most

there are resources that all families need and that vir—
tually none canprovide for themselves,nor can any but the
households provide
largest,
them. These resourcesare mostly tangible. They include af—
fordable housing for all the community’s members; publicly
funded transportation (even privately owned carsneed roads,
parkinglots,andpolice forces);waterandsewagesystems;fire

institutional

FAMILIES RIGGED TO FAIL / 35

protection; public health and safetyinspectionsand enforce—
ment; schools;public libraries; large—scalepublic recreation fa—
cilities; parks; ambulancesand other emergency services.

Itemsin the secondcategoryareprovidedmore informally
by a community but are also mostly tangible. They consist of
convenient and responsivecommercial establishments,plus
(nonpront) servicesinitiated and maintained
noncommercial
by volunteer citizens’ groups. Theselastmay,or may not, over—
lap with publicly provided resources,depending upon differ—
encesin governmentprogramsandlocalcultures:for instance,
old people’s homes and activities; churches or other commu—
nity gathering centers; concerts,
languageclasses;andjob training centers.

festivals, sports tournaments;

The third and final category of community resources is
thoroughly informal,
thoroughly intangible, and probably the
most important: speaking relationships among neighbors and
acquaintancesin addition to friends.

Everyone needsentreesinto networks of acquaintancesfor
practical aswell associal purposes. Think what the adults in a
nuclearfamily—just the two of them—areexpectedby soci—
ety to provide:

Knowledge and experience sufficient to use simple home
illnesses or wounds, and—more im—
remedies in casesof trivial
portant—the ability to judge correctly and quickly when ills
or wounds are too serious for home remedies, maybe even
life—threatening.Ability to tutor children needinghelp with
homework. Ability to be a soccermom and a hockey dad. Skill
andtactattrainingchildrento shundrugsandto be cautiousof
strangersbut not to mistrust everybody Ability to purchasere—
sponsibly,make bill and tax payments, and in general handle
money realisticallyin spite of blandishmentsto gambleor

36 / DARK AGE AHEAD

becomepronigate.Make ordinary home and equipmentre—
pairs and keep abreastof maintenance chores. Deal knowl—
edgeably with banks and bureaucracies.Pull a fair share of
family weight in community bettermenteffortsandneighbor—
hood protection.Deal civilly with peoplewhoseupbringing,
cultures, and personalities are at odds with the traditions and
customs of one’sown nuclear family, and teach children to be
both cosmopolitanand tolerant.Without this lastability,nu—
clear families can be irreparably torn asunder when relation—
ships develop between their children and lovers nom other
ethnic or religious backgrounds or, if the family is very stodgy,
simplynom other educationalor incomegroups.

thing:

Who are the paragons that, unaided and unadvised, can
earnaliving andalsoprovide all this andmore?Few of them
exist. Only membership in a functioning community makes
handling these responsibilities feasible. Another
the
neurosesof only two adults(or one) focusingrelentlesslyon
offspring can be unbearable. The diverse viewpoints and
strengths of many adults can be educational and liberating.
Two adults who have too little adult companionship besides
themselvescaneasilydrift into isolationfrom societyandbe—
come lonely, paranoid,
resentful, stressed, depressed, and at
their wits’ ends. Sitcom families and “reality” TV can and do
isolated hours, but cannot offer the support of live friends
fill
and the practical information of varied acquaintances.

One candrive todayfor miles through American suburbs
and never glimpse a human being on foot in a public space,a
human being outsidea car or truck. I haveexperiencedthis
in suburban Virginia, California,
and Massachusetts, aswell as
suburbanToronto. This is a visible signthat much of North
America hasbecomebereft of communities.For communi—

FAMILIES RIGGED TO FAIL / 37

ties to exist, people must encounter one another in person.
These encounters must include more than best friends or col—
leaguesatwork. They mustinclude diversepeoplewho share
the neighborhood, and often enough shareits needs.

Here is somethingsad:sometimesan unusuallyenergetic
and public—spirited individual
in an American or Canadian
social desert will start a campaign to improve the place: clean
up a trash—filledcreek and pond, for instance, or revive a de—
funct
local market and community center. The neighbor—
hood may even receive an award for the achievement. Then
what happens?Sometimes the noble idiosyncratic effort lacks
staying power; when the originator
is lost to aging, death, or
relocation, the project fades away,too, becauseno function—
ing community existsto carry it on. One of the great strengths
of New York City is that its neighborhood community ef—
forts typically have staying power; once under way, they tend
to persist not only for decadesbut for generations. This cul—
tural characteristic, moreover, is perhaps most marked in the
densestpart of the city, Manhattan.

Not TV or illegal drugs but the automobile has been the
chief destroyerof American communities. Highways and
roads obliterate the places they are supposed to serve, as, for
example, highways feeding the Verrazano—NarrowsBridge
wiped out most of the formerly largeBayRidge community
in Brooklyn. Robert Moses, the nearest thing to a dictator
with which New York and New Jerseyhaveever been afnicted
(so far), thought of himself asa master builder, and his much
diminishedcorps of admirersstill nostalgicallyrecallhim as
that; but he wasa masterobliterator.If he had had his way,
which he did not becauseof successfulcommunity opposition,
one of Manhattan’s most vibrant, diverse, and economically

38 / DARK AGE AHEAD

productiveneighborhoods,SoHo,would havebeensacrinced
to an expressway.Other forces, acting in concert with auto—
mobile culture, have also been pervasive.Along came sterile
housing tracts set in isolating culs—de—sac,and shopping cen—
ters whose only ties to localities were the dollars of local con—
sumers. These, often enough, erasedcommunity hearts and
landmarks, asif to make sure that marooned vestigesof what
had been lost were alsolost.

Of course, many people have opposed what was happen—
ing to former communities:thousandsupon thousandshave
poured ingenuity and energy into opposition. Some who are
fortunate enough to have communities still do fight
to keep
them, but they have seldom prevailed. While people possessa
community,they usuallyunderstandthat they can’taffordto
lose it; but after it is lost, gradually even the memory of what
was lost is lost. In miniature, this is the malady of Dark Ages.
If an economist from a neoconservative think tank wants to
deny the community destruction wrought, he will probably
point out that the American people, through the workings of
the free market, decreedthe supremacyof the automobile and
its public appurtenancesand the demise of public transit. Not
true. To claim that and be believed is to rely on massforget—
fulness of persistent corporate attacks on public transit for
the sakeof sellingoil, rubber tires, andinternal—combustion
vehicles. This strategy,led by General Motors’ Bus Division,
was tested out in a preliminary way in the 1920son two small
cities in Michigan and one in Ohio. The consortium bought
electric streetcar lines, demolished them, and replaced them
with buses,then resold the lines, tying up the saleswith con—
tracts that specified future suppliers of buses,oil, and tires. In
the 19305,with this tactic perfected, scoresof transit systems

FAMILIES RIGGED TO FAIL / 39

were bought by a General Motors subsidiary called National
City Lines. To Depression—strickencities, the ready money
nom sellingtransitsystemswasirresistible.An electric street—
car was more economical to maintain than a bus and lasted
three times aslong asa bus, so the reconstituted systemswere
extravagant.Where protesting citizens were well enough in—
formed to be awareof nnancial disadvantage,other arguments
and pressureswere brought
to bear. In New York, a foolish
mayor, Fiorello La Guardia, was convinced by Robert Moses
that streetcarswere disgracefully old—fashioned.General Mo—
tors later awarded Moses $25,000 (about $165,000 in today’s
money) for an essayon highway planning and financing and
gave a generous contribution to the city’s World’s Fair of
1939, a Moses project.

Belatedly,the antitrustdivision of the US. Departmentof
Justice askeda former judge in Minnesota to investigate what
was going on in the rash of transit sales,but with the bomb—
ing of Pearl Harbor, the government lost interest in this do—
mestic issue.Salesof electric public—transitsystemsincreased
mightily during the war and afterward.National City Lines,
together with two additional puppet subsidiaries, by 1950
controlled transit systemsin eighty—threecities, among them
Los Angeles (whose once extensive and popular web of tran—
sit vehiclescan be glimpsedin early Hollywood comedies),
Philadelphia, Baltimore, San Francisco, Portland (Oregon), Chi—
cago, St. Louis, Salt Lake City, and Tulsa, and many smaller
places, such asMontgomery, Alabama.

At the time, New York’s decision to convert from trolleys
to General Motors busesappearedto have been a major, and
perhapsdecisive,innuence on American communities to come,
but in retrospect this wry glory probably belongs instead to

40 / DARK AGE AHEAD

the New Jersey suburbs of New York and Philadelphia,
where a great web of electric trolley companies, the largest
such network in the world at the time, servedcommuters and
tied suburbs together internally and with one another. In
1946, when these highly developed systems(now vanished)
were succumbing to the General Motors vision of the world
of the future, a former employee wrote from Florida, where
he had been serving asa naval commander, to alert hundreds
of mayors, city managers, other bureaucrats, and congress—
men that they were being “swindled” by “a careful deliber—
ately planned campaign” to obliterate their “most important
and valuablepublic utilities.” He askedwhat is still a good
question:“Who will rebuild them for you?”

Again, belatedly, Congress and the Department of Justice
took notice. Nine corporations and sevenof their executives
were indicted for
tried, and
convicted. The executives were punished with $1 (yes, one
dollar) nnes each, and the corporations with
$5,000 fines
each.

illegal acts in restraint of

trade,

To this day, General Motors persists in attacks on public
transit; now the company is targeting electric trolleybuses. In
March 2003, General Motors
dealers of British Columbia
took a full—pageadvertisement in a Vancouver weekly news—
paper, picturing a Vancouver electric bus coming at
the
reader head—on,identified with a route sign proclaiming WET
DOG SMELL.(The only dogs on Vancouver buses are guide
dogs accompanying blind passengers.)The following week
the bus in the advertisement was identified as a carrier of
CREEPSAND WEIRDOS.Both advertisements urged readers to
selectthe alternative:aprivate GeneralMotors passengercar.
General Motors brought upon itself such a deluge of out—

FAMILIES

RIGGED

TO FAIL

/

4I

ragedtelephonecallsand letters that the rest of this prissy
campaign was halted—at
least temporarily, and at least in
Vancouver.

Apologists for GeneralMotors, FirestoneTire, Standard
Oil of California, and Phillips Petroleum, and the likes of
Mosesand La Guardia,maintain that electric public—transit
systemswould have failed spontaneously owing to competi—
tion from jitneys (seenote, p. 187). Their contrived failures
left taxpayersbearing no end of government subsidiesto pro—
mote use and accommodation of vehicles. Added to this were
the costsborne by hard—pressedindividuals and families who
could no longer managewithout a car. Among the many
other economic side effects hasbeen the abandonment of in—
novative streetcarsdeveloped and built during the Great De—
pression, which,
faster, more comfortable,
and still more durable and economical than previous vehicles,
weredeprivedof markets.Someof theseAmerican—developed
electric trolleys were still in service in Europe fifty yearslater.
Developed by a committee of transit company presidents,they
were called PresidentsCommittee Cars (PCCs). When Port—
land, Oregon, bought some recently it had to order them from
a manufacturer in the Czech Republic, becausethe U.S. street—
car manufacturing industry, once the largest and most techno—
logically advancedin the world, no longer exists.One is
reminded of how China capriciously jettisoned its ships.

although quieter,

Of course, General Motors,

determined

though

it was,

and still is, to force unlimited numbers of gasoline—powered
internal—combustion vehicles on America, was not powerful
enough to be solely responsible for the highways that have
obliterated communities and ensuredsuburbansprawl. In
touch upon other forces,some
chaptersthat follow, I will

42 / DARK AGE AHEAD

reachingdeepinto American culturaltraits,that haveabetted
extreme dependence on private automotive vehicles at the
expenseof community andfamily life.

At any time, the destructionof communitiesto enhance
corporations’ saleswould be a shortsighted cultural trade—off,
but the period after World War 11,extending into the new
millennium, was an especially unfortunate time for this disas—
ter. The erasuresof existingcommunities,and the stillbirths
of new ones, coincided with a great migration of peoples
within
national borders and across them, with massive shifts
of families from the land and its incomes to cities and suburbs
and their incomes; and from commodity—basedproduction to
ingenuity—basedproduction. Never were communitiesmore
needed to assimilate and cushion so many unprecedented
circumstances, and to help individuals and families make so
many adaptations and adjustments.

The collapseof Rome and the onsetof its famousDark
Age also coincided with a great migration of peoples. The
causesof those migrations differed from those today, but the
Romans, too, desperately needed strong communities to as—
similate and cushion the many people experiencing unprece—
dented circumstances, and to help individuals and families
adapt and adjust to civilization. The failing and failed Roman
communities were not equal to the responsibility and oppor—
tunity, though again for reasonsthat differ from ours.

Most of my observationson North American community
loss and other subjects are not news to anyone who takes an
interest in the conundrums of our time and is reasonablywell
fortified againstamnesia.Because,asI havealreadypointed out,
whateversignificantjolts a culture takesreverberatethrough—
I will
out
community loss again.

touch on causesor consequencesof

the culture,

FAMILIES RIGGED TO FAIL / 43

If the predicamentsof North American familiescontinue
mounting and climb further up the income ladder, I have no
idea What kinds of households will emerge to deal with needs
that familiesareat alossto nll.My intuition tellsme they will
probablybe coercive.This is alreadytrue of the most swiftly
multiplying andrapidly expandingtype of American house—
holds at the turn of the millennium—prisons.

CHAPTER

THREE

Credentialing VersusEducating

In addition to their other major expenses,some North Amer—
ican nuclear families bear the cost of a four—yearcollege or
university degree for the family’s child or children. The cost
hasbecome asnecessaryasthe cost of a car, and for a similar
reason:Without it, accessto a remunerativejob is difficult or
evenimpossible.

It haslong been recognized that getting an education is ef—

fective for bettering oneself and one’schancesin the world. But
a degreeand an education arenot necessarilysynonymous.

Credentialing, not educating, hasbecome the primary busi—
nessof North American universities. This is not in the inter—
est of employers in the long run. But
it is
benencial for corporations’ departments of human resources,
the current namefor personneldepartments.Peoplewith the
task of selecting successfuljob applicants want them to have
desirablequalities such aspersistence,ambition, and ability to

in the short run,

CREDENTIALING

VERSUS

EDUCATING

/

45

cooperateandconform, to bea “teamplayer.”At aminimum,
achieving a four—yearuniversity or college degree, no matter
in what subject,seemsto promisethesetraits.From the View—
point of a government agency’sor corporation’s department
of human resources,the institution of higher learning has
done the tediousfirst winnowing or screeningof applicants.
For the applicant, this means that a resume without one or
moredegreesfrom arespectedinstitution will not betakense—
riously enough even to be considered, no matter how able or
informed the applicantmay be. The credentialis not a pass—
port to ajob, asnaive graduatessometimes suppose.It is more
basic and necessary:a passportto consideration for ajob.

A degree can also be a passport out of an underclass,or a
safety strap to prevent its holder from sinking into an under—
class.Without
it, asNorth American high school students are
forever being warned, they will be doomed to a work life of
“nipping hamburgers.” With it, all manner of opportunities
may be accessible.

University credentialingthus enicientlycombinesthe ser—

vices to employers that in simpler and more nugal dayswere
providedby First Classor Eaglerank in the Boy Scouts,and
the servicesto aspiring climbers that in olden dayswere pro—
vided by a College of Heralds with its monopoly on granting
the coats of arms that separatedtheir possessorsfrom the un—
derclass.A coat of arms didn’t really certify that its possessor
could wield a bow or abattle—ax.That wasn’tthe point.
Students themselves understand perfectly well what

they
arebuying with four yearsof their youth and associatedtu—
ition and living costs.While a degree in some subject hasbe—
comeindispensable,one in a field with a currently promising
to be even better; thus
job market and good pay is thought

46 / DARK AGE AHEAD

student enrollment statisticshave become an unofncial ap—
pendix to stock market performance. In the summer of 2002,
when Internet and other high—techstockshad goneinto the
doldrums,TheWashingtonPostsurveyedenrollmentnguresin
undergraduate computer science departments in the Wash—
ington, DC, area;it reported:

[T]he numbersrosethrough
Nine

At Virginia Tech, enrollment
of undergraduates in the
computer sciencedepartmentwill drop 25 percentthis year
to 300. At George Washington University, the number of
incoming freshmen who plan to study computer science
fell by more than half this year.. . .
In 1997, schoolswith
Ph.D.programsin computerscienceandcomputerengineer—
ing granted8,063 degrees.
2001 when 17,048 [Ph.D.] degrees were awarded.
the 2,000 plus undergraduatesstudying in—
hundred of
formation technology and engineering at George Mason
University were computer science majors last year. This
yearthe enrollment in that major is down to 800, although
a newly createdand more generalinformation technology
major hasattracted200 students.
“Having it easeoff for
a while is a bit of a relief,” said a [George Mason] dean.
they don’t want
“Particularly
to spendfour yearson something and then not get ajob.”

. . .

with

the field as it has been,

. . .

. . .

The two students whose comments were included in the
newspaper’s report, apparently as representative of student
thinking, advanced somewhat different reasonsfor shifts from
earlierplans.One,who wasswitchingto anunspecifiedengi—
neeringmajor, saidhe wantedto do something“more social
and more interesting than working with computers. . . .
Be—

CREDENTIALING

VERSUS

EDUCATING

/

4’7

sides,you can’t get the chicks with that anymore.” The other,
who was switching to businessmarketing, said, “Technology
comes natural to people my age.It’s not fascinating anymore.”
In the meantime, the Postreported, the US. Department of
Labor was contradictorily projecting that “software engineer—
ing will be the fastestgrowing occupation between 2000 and
2010 with other computer—related industries trailing close
behind.”

All universities possesstheir own subcultures, and so do
departmentswithin universities,varyingto thepoint of being
indifferent or even antagonistic to one another, so a general—
ization cannot describe all accurately.But it is safeto saythat
credentialing as primary business of
institutions of higher
learning had gotten under way in the 19605.Studentswere
the first to notice the change.In the unrest and turbulence of
that decade, one thread of complaint came from students
who claimed they were shortchanged in education. They had
expected more personal rapport with teachers who had be—
come only remote figures in large, impersonal
lecture halls.
The studentswere protesting attempts to transmit culture that
omitted acquaintance with personal examples and failed to
place them on speaking terms with wisdom.
cade,however, students dropped that cause,apparently taking
it for grantedthat credentialingis the normal primary busi—
nessof institutions of higher learning and that its cost is an
unavoidable initiation fee into acceptableadulthood. If a stu—
dent takes out a loan to meet the expense, he or she may
reach early middle age by the time the loan is paid off. The
guarantee behind the loan is the valuable credential itself

In another de—

“College degreeworth millions, surveyfinds,”my morning
paper tells me in July 2002. Every summer for years readers

48 / DARK AGE AHEAD

have been given similar tidings, buttressedby statistics,some—
times nom government, sometimes from universities them—
selves.The surveyin this casehad been made by the US.
Census Bureau, which reported, the paper said, that “some—
one whose education does not go beyond high school and
who worksfull time canexpectto earnabout$1.2million be—
tween ages25 and 64.
Graduating from college and earn—
ing advanceddegreestranslateinto higher lifetime earnings:
an estimated $4.4 million for doctors, lawyers and others with
professionaldegrees;$2.5 million for collegegraduates,”that
is, those with a bachelor’s degree.

. . .

At this point in the news report, apolicy analyst(presumably
with a degreeto validatethe title) working for the American
Council on Education, identified as“a higher education advo—
cacy group,” chimed in with the moral: “Not all studentslook
at college asan investment, but I’m sure their parents do. The
challengeisto convincethosehigh schoolstudentson themar—
gins that it is really worth their time to go to college.”

The survey found that men with professional degreesmay
expect to earn almost $2 million more than “women with the
same level of education,”
to the time
out that women take to bear and rear infants.

a difference attributed

The trends in the United States have followed in Canada,
with the usual time lag. A forum panelist in Toronto, askedby
a troubled parent, “When did we decide to change the way
we thought about public education?” replied in an essaypub—
lished in 2003: “Today’s youngsters have had it drummed into
their heads that a post—secondaryeducation is the key to a
goodjob.
[It] isno longerconsideredasaninvestmentthat
societymakesin the neXt generation;it is seenasan invest—
ment that students make in themselves.” The panelist/ essayist

. . .

CREDENTIALING

VERSUS

EDUCATING

/

49

assignedthe startof the Canadianchangeto the late 1980s,
tracing it as a decline then and through the 19905 in public
funding to universities and colleges while their enrollments
were growing nom 15 percent of high school graduates in
1975to 20 percentin 2001,with educatorsandlegislatorsex—
pecting that it will reach 25 percent in the near future.

Expansion of nrst—ratefaculty—memorable teachers of
the kind the 19605studentprotesterswere mourning—has
not kept pace with expansion of enrollments and coursesof—
fered; professors lack the time and energy they could once
devote to personal contact with students. Slack has been
taken up by what became known as“gypsy faculty,” lecturers
hoping for permanent appointments asthey move from uni—
versity to university, and by graduate students aspart of their
apprenticeships.So many papersto mark, relative to numbers
and qualities of mentors to mark them, changed the nature of
test papers. Some came to consist of
“True or false?” and
“Which of
the following is correct?” types of questions, fit
for robots to answer and to rate, rather than stimulants and as—
sessmentsof critical thinking anddepth of understanding.

In the meantime, rejoicing that university education has
become a growth industry, administrators and legislators seek
increasingly to control problems of scaleby applying lessons
from profit—makingenterprisesthat turn expandedmarkets
to advantage by cutting costs. Increased output of product
can be measured more easily as numbers of credentialed
graduates than as numbers of educated graduates. Quantity
trumps quality.

Community colleges that grant two—yeardiplomas in ap—
plied arts and sciencesrepresent a midstation in life, like a sec—
ond—classticket in the traditional European transportation

50 / DARK AGE AHEAD

this,

arrangementof first andsecondclassesandthird classor steer—
age.Two—yearcommunity colleges supply the economy with
techniciansof manykindsfor hospitalsandclinics,draftsmen
for architectural and engineering nrms, designersof graphics,
lighting, and costumesfor televisionshows,expositions,and
plays,and many,many other skilled workers and craftsmen.
Community colleges have typically maintained an admirably
close connection between education and training and the
diploma credential. But
is now on the verge of a
transformation into credentialing disconnected from educa—
tion. In my home province of Ontario, Canada, a few com—
munity collegeshavealreadypromoted themselvesinto “an
elite level” by gaining government licensesto grant four—year
degreesthat will upstage diplomas. The push for this change
came from community college administrators, although they
were divided about
its desirability. Some feared it would
“compromise access.”One, who applauded it, argued that his
institution hasneeded a degree—grantinglicense “in order for
our college to compete in a sophisticated economy where a
degreeis the currencyof the realm.”

too,

To put it crassly,first—classelite—leveltickets cost more than
second—classtickets.“UndergradTuition Feesup 135%over11
Years,” shouts a headline over a 2002 analysis by Statistics
Canada,the country’s censusbureau. Cuts havecausedgovern—
ment funding to fall far behind fifteen yearsof compounded in—
nation. Appended to the newspaperreport of the costincreases
was a comment by the chair of a national student federation,
who noted, “It’s no longer just the poorest of the poor who are
denied. It’s creeping up the income ladder.”

As currencyof the realm,credentialsareattractiveto coun—
(cre—

terfeiters. So it is not surprising to learn that “experts”

CREDENTIALING

VERSUS

EDUCATING

/ SI

dentialsunspecined)estimatethat 30percentof job applicants
false resumes, and that a former mayor of San Fran—
concoct
cisco,when told that his chief of police had lied about his col—
lege degrees,pooh—poohedthe revelation with the comment,
“I don’t know who doesn’tlie on their resumes.”It is surpris—
ing, however,to learn that captainsof industry givein to the
temptation. After an unsuccessful career as an executive at
the successful chief executive of Bausch &
General Motors,
Lomb, a venerable and respected maker of
lensesand other
eye—careproducts, was shown not to possessa master of busi—
nessadministration degree, asclaimed in his biographical ma—
terials.His competencewasaffirmed by his corporation’s board,
andneither he nor the companysufferedfrom the revelation
except for a sharp but temporary drop in the company’sstock.
Other executiveshavebeen lessfortunate. The chief executive
of Veritas Software was fired for falsely claiming an MBA from
StanfordUniversity, and others have been publicly embar—
rassed.One told the press,“At some point I probably felt inse—
cure and it perpetuated itself” The Bausch & Lomb president,
standing on his dignity, wins the arm’s—lengthprize: “I’m em—
barrassed,” he told the press, “that some of
in—
formation appearedin some of our published materials on my
background. Clearly, it’s my obligation to proof—readsuch
things carefully and ensure their accuracy”

this incorrect

Credentialing is an indirect legacy of the Great Depression of
the 19305.Along with much elsein North American culture,
credentialing’sorigins and appeal cannot be understood
without harking back to the Depression years.

The physicalandnnancialhardshipsof Americain theyears
1930—39were mild in comparison with hardshipsendured in

52 / DARK AGE AHEAD

the twentieth century by societiesthat suffered famine, geno—
cide, ethnic cleansing, oppression, bombing raids, or defeat in
war.The Depression,however,exertedalastinginnuenceon
Americans, out of all proportion to its short duration and rel—
atively mild ordeals. Nobody understood what was happen—
ing whenjobs andsavingsvanishedandstagnationsettledon
the United Statesand Canada.Even now, some seventyyears
later,economistscontinue to disputethe Depression’scauses.
Mass unemployment was the single greatest disaster.At
its
worst,it idledsome25percentof workersin the United States
and Canada, and higher percentages in hard—hit localities.
When oneconsidersall the otherswho directly andindirectly
depended on those workers, unemployment or its effects
touchedalmosteveryoneother thanthe exceptionallyrich or
sheltered.Government make—workand semi—welfarepro—
grams, some of them admirably ingenious and constructive,
helped but did not cure, and they had their own insecurities
and humiliations.

Some people spent most of

the Depression years standing
in lines for a chance at a temporary job, for delayedpay from
bankrupt companies, for lost savingsin failed banks, for bowls
of soup or loavesof day—oldbread. One seesthe anxious rows
of pinched facesin photographs of the time. Also in photo—
graphsone seesralliesof protesterswith their signs,quailing
before mounted police and raised billy clubs. Often with in—
credible bravery, and alwayswith incalculable expenditures of
time, scrimped savings,and hopes, protesters devoted them—
selvesto political activitiesthat they hadconvincedthemselves
would be benencial. Quieter
involvement with intellectual
schemes,like technocracy,socialcredit, and EPIC (End Poverty
in California, the platform of Upton Sinclair’sunsuccessful

CREDENTIALING

VERSUS

EDUCATING

/

53

campaignfor electionasthat state’sgovernor),wasa comfort
to many Others busied themselves politically with combat
against those who espoused Marxism, Trotskyism, or other
radical politics. Some of these, too, and their opponents turn
up in photographsof sessionsof the US. Houseof Represen—
tatives Un—American Activities Committee.

However, most attempts at living through the Depression
arenot documentedin photographsatall; theywereonly very
lightly touched on in films, and almost as lightly in music.
Peoplewho weren’tusedto beingidle andunwantedtried to
keep busy somehow; but evenjobs at no pay,valued for learn—
ing and experience, were hard to get. Architects madejigsaw
puzzlesandrenderingsof ghastly,inhumanutopiancitiesand
sold them if customers could be found.
I got a job without
pay,for ayear,on the Scranton,Pennsylvania,morning paper.
The editor needed another reporter but lacked money to hire
one. I earned his staff’5generous tutoring by producing news
items and articles the paper used. Although
the paper
was unionized (Scranton had the second Newspaper Guild
local in the United States),nobody objected to my Depression
make—dobarter agreement.

For individuals,

the worst side effect of unemployment
was repeated rejection, with its burden of shame and failure.
Many quietly despaired that the world had a place for them.
This hopelessness, at the time, seemed endless. Would life al—
waysbe like this?Somethingunfathomable,without visible
cause,had engulfed everyone’sexpectations and plans.

For someone in her teens or early twenties, as I was dur—
ing the Depressiondecade,it wasn’treallysobad.My friends
and I could make stories out of our rejections and frugalities
andthe strangepeoplewe met up with in our futile searches

54 / DARK AGE AHEAD

and could bask in the gaspsor laughs we generated. It was
harder for people in their thirties, who had gotten launched
(they thought) in careersthat so soon came to nothing. For
peoplein their forties or nfties,rejectionsand idlenesscould
be devastating.The parents of some of my friends never re—
coveredeasewith themselves,their families,or societyafter
this demoralizing break in their lives. It was harder on men
who hadbeenfamily breadwinnersthan on women who de—
voted themselvesto homemaking and child rearing, as most
did after marriage.

My father, a doctor, worked long hours, seven days a week,
and in spite of wearinesshe stayedin good spirits becausehe
was needed and, especially,becausehis work interested him.
like everyone else, he worried about getting by. In our
But,
little city, where the chief
industry was mining expensive,
high—gradeanthracite coal, the Great Depression was intensi—
fied because,in effect, it had started four years early with a
long and bitter coal strike and subsequentloss of markets.

Fewof my father’spatientswereableto payhim, asthe ef—
fects of massunemployment spread.He told me one Saturday
evening in 1936 that he had to earn $48 a day merely to pay
for his ofnce rent, his subscriptions to medical journals, office
supplies, and the salary of his assisting nurse. To me that
seemed an incomprehensibly formidable sum; 1 was earning
$12 a week in New York asa stenographer in a candy manu—
facturing company that soon went into bankruptcy. He eX—
pressed relief
that that day he had broken even, thanks to
twelve hours of hard, concentrated work in his office and the
hospitalswhere he wasa visiting physicianand surgeon.He
wasnot unique.CountlessAmericanswho thought of them—
selvesasthe backboneof the country kept doing their work
regardlessof the struggle and helped hold things together.

CREDENTIALING

VERSUS

EDUCATING

/

55

When the stagnationlifted, at first tentativelyin 1938—39

asthe armament economy clicked in, and then in full force in
1942 after America entered the war, the change was miracu—
lous. It was too late for my father, who had died in 1937.
Everyone knew it was ghoulish to delight
in jobs and pros—
perity at the price of war; nevertheless,everyoneI knew was
grateful that suddenly good jobs and pay raisesshowered like
rain afteradrought.It seemedthat the world did needus,and
had placesfor us.

After the war was over, during the euphoria of victory and
the Marshall Plan and the Korean War, a
the minor booms of
consensusformed and hardened acrossNorth America.
it
had been voiced, it would have gone something like this: “VI/e
canenduremeaningfultrials and overcomethem.But neveragain—
neuer,never—will we sunerthe meaninglessdisasterof massunem-
ployment.”

If

Cultures take purposes for themselves, cling tenaciously to
them, and exalt them into the purposes and meanings of life
itself. For instance, in ancient Rome the ideal of service to
the statewas the overriding cultural purpose.After the re—
public wassucceededby the empire,Virgil addeda slightly
new spin,in a passageof the Aeneidcited with reverenceby
the emperor Augustus: “Your task, Roman, is this: to rule the
peoples. This is your special genius: to enforce the habits of
peace, to sparethe conquered, to subdue the proud.”

In medieval Western Europe and in early colonial Puritan
the purpose of life, which had been reshapeddur—
America,
ing the Dark Age, becamethe salvationof souls,one’sown
and others’, for the Christian Kingdom of Heaven.

In the founding period of the United States,a time when

the Copernican, Newtonian,
had succeeded both medievalism and the Renaissance,

and Cartesian Enlightenment

the

56 / DARK AGE AHEAD

culturalpurposebecameindependence.Not for nothing was
reasons behind the war of separation from
the charter of
Britain called the Declaration of
Independence, and July
Fourth called Independence Day. An accompanying cult de—
veloped around liberty, as symbolized by both the Liberty
Bell and the aims of
Independence
and liberty were succeededby the related freedom, indeed by
two connictingversionsof freedom:the political freedomof
states’rights, offshoot of
independence, and the social free—
dom of abolition of slavery,offshoot of liberty.

the French Revolution.

In the decades after the Civil War, and the bloodletting
that seemedbrieny to resolve the connict between concepts
of freedom, there was no obvious American cultural consen—
suson the purposeof life, although there were contenders,
such as the Manifest Destiny of America’s push westward,
which had already risen to its height
in the 18405with the
Mexican War, the annexation of Texas, and the purchase of
California and New Mexico. Manifest Destiny was extended
at the turn of the century by President Theodore Roosevelt
to the Caribbeanandthe Pacincwith the Spanish—American
War,which wastakenby Americansto meanAmerican rule
over the Western Hemisphere.

The start of the twentieth century and the decadesimme—
diately beforeand afterwere a time of reforming ferment as
Americans sought to perfect their society by eliminating child
labor, extending the vote to women, combating corruption
and naud, embracing public health measuresand their enforce—
ment, prohibiting the saleof alcohol, outlawing monopolies
as restraints on trade, initiating environmental conservation
through nationalparks(afavorite of Theodore Roosevelt’s),
improving working conditions and protecting the rights of

CREDENTIALING

VERSUS

EDUCATING

/

5’7

labor, and pursuing many other practical reforms into which
their proponents threw themselves with ardor as great as if
eachof theseaimswereindeedthe purposeof life.

The reforming spirit carried into the Great Depression
years,with PresidentFranklin Roosevelt’spromotion of the
Four Freedoms, linking economic aims (freedom from want)
to human rights (freedom from fear) and his practical mea—
suresfor making the links tangible, among them his success—
ful advocacy of collective bargaining under the Robert F.
Wagner proposals that became the National Labor Relations
Act, and his institution of a regulatory Securities and EX—
changeCommission(SEC),makingrulesfor public corpora—
tions’ disclosuresand reining in speculativemanipulationsin
corporate stocks. Eleanor Roosevelt, Franklin’s wife, for her
part, channeled her lifelong experience with smallish reform
movements into advocacy of
the United Nations and, most
notably, into that body’s formulation and acceptance of a
declaration of universal human rights, her chief
legacy and
monument. Among all theseand other contendersfor the
American purposeof life, one seemedto win out, lesswith
fanfare than with simple quiet acceptance: the American
dream, the ideal that each generation of whites, whether im—
migrant or native—born,was to become more successfuland
prosperous than the parent generation.

From the 1950son, American culture’s glosson the purpose
of life becameassuranceof full employment:jobs. Arguably,
this has remained the American purpose of
in spite of
competition nom the Cold War with the Soviet Union, and
maybeevenfrom the War on Terrorism,in which postwar
reconstructionwaslinkedwith contractsfor Americancompa—
nies and hencejobs for Americans.

life,

58 / DARK AGE AHEAD

How doesa culture revealits concept of the purposeof
life? A cultural purpose enablesperpetrators and witnessesto
regard horrinc deedsasrighteous. Republican Rome’s defeat
of Carthage and its people—Virgil’s cant notwithstanding—
was as gruesomea murder sceneof helplessand innocent
people ashas been recorded; it was deemed glorious by Ro—
mans because they construed it as a righteous act of pre—
emptive protection for the state.Looting and massacresby
sixteenth—centurySpanishconquistadores in South and Cen—
tral Americawerejustinedby the samecultural drivesfor sal—
vation of soulsthat justined the labors, sacrinces,and risks of
Spanish missionaries. The aggressionsof crusading soldiers
and kings againstMuslim “inndels” in the Middle Eastand
Christian
the tortures and executions in
Europeby Catholic inquisitorsandProtestantwitch—hunters;
the persecutions and forced conversions of Jews; the oppres—
sionsby Puritans in Britain and New England—theseand
other deedsthat created hell on earth were all righteouslyjus—
tined asdefeatsof the devil and salvation of souls.

heretics in France;

In 1956, when Congresspassedlegislation funding the In—
terstate Highway System—a government program then un—
precedented in America for its vast physical scope and vast
cost—the ostensiblereasonfor the program was to allow resi—
dentsandworkersto evacuatecitiesandtownsspeedilyandef—
nciently in caseof emergency (a Roman type of purpose).
However, memories of the Great Depressionwere sufnciently
nesh for everyone to recognize instantly the real and serious
purposeof the program:full employment;guaranteeof jobs:
jobs building roads,jobs designing, manufacturing, servicing,
and repairingautomobiles,jobs renningand transportingoil
and nlling gasoline tanks. President Dwight D. Eisenhower
himself acknowledged this purpose in his remarks about the

CREDENTIALING

VERSUS

EDUCATING

/

59

automobileasa mainstayof the economyand employment,
when he spokeat the George Washington Bridge in New York
at a celebration asthe highway program was getting under way

To settle on the auto industry asthe instrument for achiev—
ing jobs, the grandcultural purposeof life, wasso aptthat it
mayhavebeenall but inevitable.Automobiles,for thosewho
could afford them, were loaded with references and romances
from earlier American purposes and meanings of
life: inde—
pendence, freedom, the successof getting a better car than
one’s parents could afford—moving up from a Pontiac to a
Buick. Nobody recognized and approved the job—making
purpose of
the highway system more heartily than mayors
and other electedofficials. The shortsighteddestruction of
community in America was easily trumped by the righteous—
nessof full employment.

Any institution,

Connicts between highway building

and community
values—or any other values—set a pattern that has persisted
after memories of
the Great Depression have faded. To for—
eigners, it seemsinconsistent that America promotes global—
ization of trade, yet alsogivessubsidiesto American agriculture
that sorely hurt poor African economies; claps tariffs on
Canadian sawn lumber and Brazilian steel, and setsquotas on
imports of Chinese textiles. To American trade negotiators
and lobbyists, however,
in contra—
dictory policies that, each in its own way, are calculated to
promotejobs for Americans.What is inconsistentaboutthat?
is
bent upon ecological destruction or an outrage on the built
environmentarguesits caseor bulliesits opponentsby righ—
teously citing the jobs that supposedlywill materialize or, even
more effectively, the jobs that may be forfeited or jeopardized
if the ugly deed is not done. To this day,no alternative disaster,

including a government agency, that

there is no inconsistency

60 / DARK AGE AHEAD

including possibleglobalwarming, is deemedasdire a threat
asjob loss.At a time in 2002 when Canada’sArctic was un—
mistakably melting—and unexpectedly rapidly, too—the pre—
mier of Ontario was asked whether he would support the
Canadian prime minister in his professedintent
to ratify the
Kyoto accordon reductionof climate—warmingfossil—fuelemis—
sionsor would insteadfollow the lead of US. president George
W Bush in repudiating the accord.His reply: “We’re not
going to put ourselvesat a huge disadvantageand cost Ontar—
.while our American
ianshundredsof thousandsof jobs.
neighbors to the south—God bless them—are not doing
somethingaboutreducingtheir emissions.”

.

That is the Great Depression speaking, on both sidesof the
life go, a job for
border. As exalted cultural purposesof
everyone is lessbrutal and deluded than most cultural
ideals.
But, asmy grandmother used to say,“You can run anything
into the ground.”

Whether jobs have been succeededby the War on Terror—
ism asthe American purpose of life is still unclear. The swift
surrenderof entitlement to a speedytrial, protection against
legal counsel or charges,and privacy, and,
being held without
in the case of captured combatants, the abrogation of
the
Geneva Conventions on treatment of prisoners of war, argue
that
the exigencies of outmaneuvering putative terrorists
have overridden other values, including economic prudence.
As Margaret Atwood has pointed out, the surrender of civil
and naud.”
rights is “a recipe for widespread businesstheft
Perhapswe must wait for new arrangementsfor control of
Middle Eastern oil and reconstruction of Afghanistan and
Iraq to learnwhether the purposeof American life hasactu—
ally switchedfrom providingjobs andearningpronts.

. . .

It has been truly said that the past lives on in the present.

CREDENTIALING

VERSUS

EDUCATING

/

61

This is true of credentialism’s origins. It emerged partly out
of America’s humiliation and worry when the Soviet Union,
with its Sputnik, had beatenAmerica into space,and partly
from the still—freshdread of
the Depression. Credentialism
emerged, mostly in California at nrst, in the late 19505,when
it dawned upon university administrators there that modern
economic development, whether in the conquest of spaceor
any other neld, depended on a population’s funds of knowl—
edge—a resource that later came to be known ashuman cap—
followed that development’s most culturally valuable
ital. It
product—jobs—also depended on knowledge. The adminis—
trators were quite right, and it was brainy of them to reason
that the more of this crucial resource their institutions could
nurture andcertify,the better for all concerned.

the civic banner of

Initially there was no connict between this aim and the
the education that administrators expected their
quality of
institutions to supply.That connict began to arise in the
1960s, partly out of universities’ attempts to take on many
new tasksat once, asthey engagedwith the communities that
supported them. Under
the “multiver—
sity” they aimed at furthering every good thing they set their
abundantintellectsto. Farfrom elevatingcredentialingabove
educating, they were sweepingly enlarging the idea of edu—
catingto embracewhateverskillsseemedneeded,from cost—
benefit analysis to marketing. Administrators surely did not
recognize how much these enlarged ambitions, coupled with
the promise of riches to society from credentialed graduates,
would change universities themselves.

As always in a culture, everything that happened con—
nected with much else.In this case,multiversity educational
expansionhad connectionswith a constructiveU.S.govern—
ment program for war veterans.

62 / DARK AGE AHEAD

After World War II andthen the KoreanWar,the govern—

ment provided tuition and encouragement for veterans who
had the desire and qualincations to attend universities or col—
leges.Tensof thousandsof former GIs, many from families
in which nobody had ever before been given a chanceat
higher education, took advantageof this opportunity. On the
whole, the veteranswere noted for applying themselvesmore
seriouslythan studentsjust out of high school. They also
swelled student enrollments. When the stream of GI students
ran dry, their hunger for education was missed in university
communities, along with their government—guaranteedtu—
itions. Credentialing emergedas a growth industry in the
19605just when universitiesneededit to addressproblemsof
their own.

The more successfulcredentialingbecameasa growth in—
from the view—
dustry, the more it dominated education,
points of both teachersandstudents.Teacherscould not help
despairing of classeswhose members seemedlessinterested in
learning than in doing the minimum work required to get by
and get out. Enthusiasticstudentscould not help despairing
of institutions that seemed to think of them asraw material
to processas efficiently aspossible rather than ashuman be—
ings with burning questions and confusions about the world
and doubts about why they were sinking time and money
into this prelude to their working lives.

Students who are passionateabout learning, or could be—
come so, do exist. Faculty members who love their subjects
passionately and are eager to teach what
they know and to
plumb its depthsfurther alsoexist.But institutionsdevotedto
respectingand fulfilling theseneedsas their first purposes
have become rare, under pressure of different necessities.
Similar trends in Britain havebegun to worry some educators

CREDENTIALING

VERSUS

EDUCATING

/

63

there. My impressionis that university—educatedparentsor
grandparentsof studentspresently in university do not realize
how much the experiencehaschangedsincetheir own stu—
dent days,nor do the studentsthemselves,sincethey havenot
experiencedanything else.Only faculty who havelived through
the lossrealize what hasbeen lost.

A vigorous culture capableof making corrective, stabilizing
changesdependsheavily on its educatedpeople, and especially
upon their critical capacities and depth of understanding.
Most partsof North America havealreadybecomebackward
in production and distribution of renewable forms of energy.
As for the continent’s cherished automobile and roadsindus—
tries, how stagnant they are! For decades,improvements in
automobilemanufacturingand designhavecome from else—
where, notably]apan and Germany.Changesto combatthe
wastesof suburban sprawl and lack of suburban communities
don’t come at all, in spiteof much talk and hand—wringing;
neither do solutions to city trafnc problems, subjects I shall
touch on in the next chapter. They, too, are connected with
credentialism at the expense of education.

CHAPTER

FOUR

Science Abandoned

In North America, science is admired almost to the point of
worship. It is easyto understand why. Scienceand its offspring,
science—basedtechnology, have lengthened and lightened the
humanlife span.Sciencehasenrichedour acquaintancewith
our planet: revealed its geological history, instructed us in the
life the planet supports, cautioned us about its vulnerabilities
and the protection we owe it, and clarinedthe interdepen—
dence of its parts.

To be sure,scienceis alsomistrusted by those who don’t like
its discoveriesfor religious, political, ethical, or even esthetic
reasons.Some thoughtful people complain that science has
erasedenchantment nom the world. They have a point. Mir—
acles,magic,andother fascinatingimpossibilitiesareno longer
much encountered except in movies. But in the light shed by
thebestscienceandscientists,everythingisfascinating,andthe
more so the more that is known of its reality To science,not

SCIENCE ABANDONED

/ 65

even the bark of a tree or a drop of pond water is dull or a
handful of dirt banal. They all arouseawe and wonder.

Science doesn’t supply happiness;but neither doesits lack.
The samecan be said of social utopias: they aren’t created by
science,but neither doeslack of scienceprovide them. Sci—
ence has cast up dangerous and cruel knowledge, which has
been exploited for warfare and dictatorial power; but so have
cultures solittle gifted with scientiststhat they either make do
with imported weapons or rely on clubs, axes, and daggers.
Scientinc information
that
deforestation invites mud slides and deserts, that overfishing
depletes fish stocks—doesn’t guarantee we will avoid such
mistakesor correct them, but that is owing to failure to heed
what scienceuncovers.

about our mistakes—for

instance,

Despite all of science’sshortcomings asa source of perfec—

it still remains that

the wealth, well—being, and creative
tion,
power of our culture, and increasingly of South and EastAsia
aswell, depend heavily on science and technology.

What

is this valuable thing? It

isn’t a thing but a state of
mind.
Its aim is to get at truths about how reality works.
However, that aim in itself does not distinguish sciencefrom
spying, guessing, and using analogies, which also, with less
successthan science, aim at discovering truths. The scientific
pursuit of truth usesno end of tools, rangingfrom sensitive
scalesable to register the weight of a hair to observatories of
the heavens.

Science is distinguished from other pursuits by the precise
and limited intellectual meansthat it employs and the in—
tegrity with which it usesits limited means.The standardde—
scription of the scientificstateof mind outlinesfour stepsor
stages,beginning with a fruitful question.

66 / DARK AGE AHEAD

Science constantly builds further upon truths it hasalready
bagged.Each further discovery startsanew with its own fruit—
ful question.“Fruitful” meansthat the question must take
into account, as far as possible, everything already known
about the object, event, or processunder scrutiny and, amid
this richnessof information, mustsingleout asalientmystery
or obscurity This is harder than it sounds, because salient
mysteries are apt to be overlooked or taken for granted. EX—
amples from the past could be: “How doeswater get up into
clouds?” and “How does blood from the feet get up to the
heart?” Each of
in its own context, was
splendidlyfruitful. I havemischievouslycoupledthemhereto
suggesthow misleading analogiescan be.

these questions,

After fruitful questionsare answered,the answersthem—
selvesdisposeof falseanalogies:for instance,what an absur—
dity to supposethat evaporation does the work of leg veins’
valves,or vice versa.Yet aswe shall see,slovenly use of analo—
gies is one pitfall of some North American science.

Equipped with a fruitful question, the scientistframesa
hypothetical answer, accounting as elegantly and economi—
cally aspossible—"parsimoniously”
is the word favored—for
the truth that he or she suspectsis hiding behind the ques—
tion. The question, and the hypothetical answer, together
constitute two closely linked stagesthat require insight, imag—
ination, and courage, qualities possessedby all creative scien—
tists, and in high degree by scientific geniuses.

In the third stage,the hypothesis is tested, by both its cre—
ator and others. Ultimately,
the real world testsall hypotheses,
and usually quickly. When answersfrom the real world seem
to comeslowly,it is seldomthe evidenceitself that is slowto
appear;rather,observersareblind to evidenceor emotionally

SCIENCE ABANDONED

/ 67

can’tbearto credit it. This is why the crashingof the Berlin
Wall nnally was required as an exclamation point, after un—
heeded evidence of many decadesreported that Marxism was
untruthful asaneconomictheory.An examplefrom medicine
is the discovery that peptic ulcers are causedby bacteria, not
psychologicalstress;for years,the evidenceassembledby an
Australian doctor was ignored by other specialists.

Deliberate testsof a hypothesis can often be contrived ex—
like those
perimentally. Tests contrived in the laboratory,
coming in unsought from life, are uselessin the absenceof
observers alert to evidence, or in the presence of observers
who lack respect for evidence. Wishful
thinking absolutely
does not do. If a hypothesis standsup well to assaultby test—
ing, it is eventuallyacceptedastheory or evenlaw,asin “the
law of gravity” or “the laws of perspective.”

In its fourth and final stage,a successfulhypothesis opensup
questionspreviouslynot evenknown to exist.For instance,a
theory that cholera epidemics spreadfrom contaminated drink—
ing water—astartling finding by John Snow, a nineteenth—
century London physicianwho noticed a correspondence
betweenincidenceof casesand a district in the city that was
served by a specific well—opened up the sequel question,
“How does drinking water become contaminated by cholera
asan infectious agent?” The answer,“Sewage,” opened up still
further questions. Copernicus’s stupendous theory that
the
earth revolves around the sun opened up many other ques—
tions, such as“What holds the earth to its course?”

This fourth stage,the questionchain, sustainsscienceasa
bodies of

coherent process, erecting continuous,
knowledge. Thus science itself, rather than the will of scien—
tists or the judgments of patrons and grant givers, directs its

coherent

68 / DARK AGE AHEAD

own organization,alongwith providing automaticand con—
tinual self—renewal.New questions turning up in the question
chain,especiallyif they areasurprise,return the entireprocess
to its first stage:again,the time is ripe to posea salientand
fruitful question.

In this account, I have idealized the processby making it

appear tidier than it usually is. Earlier, I called science—based
technologythe offspringof science.It would be quiteastruth—
ful to speak of
technology—basedscience as the offspring of
technology.

Discovering truth, when the processis initiated with tech—
nology, often begins with the question “How?”
rather than
“Why?” or even “What?” Louis Pasteur’sgreat question “How
canwine be protectedfrom spoiling during fermentation?”
and the further questions opened up underlie all bacteriolog—
ical knowledge.

“How can we get water power to drive a boat?” “How can
the power of steam drive a machine?” “How can the actions
of the machine direct and control the actions of the steam?”
“How do the egg and the sperm together create the plant’s
heredity?” “How do losing cultures lose?”

Questions like these employ the samestate of mind asthe
idealized procedure I sketched out. The main difference is a
matter of timing among the stages.In “How?” questions,
which are often technology driven,
the hypothesis is apt to
come qfterexperimentsand evidence,and to be formed by
results of the experiments and evidence (often in many sub—
stagesof investigationandcorrection) asmuch asby an orig—
inal question.Along the way, many minor insightsmay be
contributed, insteadof one grand,major insight.A hypothe—
sisformed at a late stageof a project can be quite asgrand as

SCIENCE ABANDONED

/ 69

one that takesthe lead—and can be a major surprise too, not
having been an answer consciously sought in advance.

Late—forminghypothesestend to makeuseof feedback,an
information processanalyzedby mid—twentieth—centurycom—
puter scientists.Feedbackis now understood and valued ases—
sentialto dynamicsystems,conspicuouslyincluding ecological
and biochemical systems and early childhood neurological
development;feedbackis so essentialin thesesystemsthat if
it halts or malfunctions,
the whole system dies or otherwise
fails. In science, feedback is evidence.

In sum,

the scientific state of mind works along two
slightly different avenues,one abstract,the other feeling its
way more concretely and pragmatically. Both approachesde—
mandintegrity, awarenessof evidenceandrespectfor it, and
attention to new questionsthat ariseasimmediatepractical
problems to be grappled with, or else as more abstract and
postponable. Both avenuesarevalid and effective. They work
together so well
that they frequently shift back and forth in
the courseof aninvestigation,or they overlap.

inquiry becomes disconnected from the sci—

If a body of

entific stateof mind, that unfortunate segment of knowledge
is no longer scientific. It stagnates.Intellectually,
it is poison—
ous, because thereafter almost everything the stagnated and
warpedknowledgetouchesis harmedby it. Nazi ideologies
of race, Marxist
ideologies of economics and social utopias,
capitalistconfusionof commercialcompetitionwith Darwin—
ism, along with the elimination of cooperation from under—
standingof evolution, areall examplesof inquiries claiming
scientificvalidity that were disconnectednom the scientific
stateof mind andsankinto dogma.

Thomas Kuhn, a twentieth—century historian of science,

7o / DARK AGE AHEAD

has pointed out that previously established scientinc verities
are themselvescapable of hampering scientinc advancement.
He called such verities paradigms and drew attention to the
fact that they shapepeople’s entire worldviews. Most people
do not enjoy having their entire worldview discredited; it sets
them uncomfortably adrift. Scientistsare no exception. A
paradigm tends to be so greatly cherished that, asnew knowl—
edge or evidence turns up that contradicts it or calls it
into
question, the paradigm is embroidered with qualincations and
exceptions,alongwith laboredpseudo—explanations—anything,
no matter how intellectually disreputable or craven, to avoid
losing the paradigm.If a paradigmis truly obsolete,it must
nnally give way,discreditedby the testingof the realworld.
But outworn paradigms ordinarily
stand staunchly until
somebodywithin the neldmakesa leap of insight, imagina—
tion, and courage sufncient to dislodge the obsolete paradigm
and replace it.

The scientinc state of mind is a major marvel in its own
right. Sometimesit slipsup, either in the interest of preserving
an unnt paradigm or becauseit has fallen asleep.These lapses
arenot asnefariousasbetrayalsof sciencethataremotivatedby
greed or pursuit of power, but neverthelessthey aredangerous,
perhaps the more so because they do not necessarily signal
their dishonestywith obviouslyugly immorality The enemyof
truth is untruth, whatever its motivation. Even high—minded
“scientinc”untruth alwaysexactscosts,andoftentheyarelarge
and ramined beyond all preliminary calculation.

1 am now going to relate a few illustrative instances in

which the scientincstateof mind hasbeenbetrayedand sci—
enceabandoned,while thosecarryingout the ugly deedspre—
tend that nothing of

the kind has happened and perhaps do

SCIENCE ABANDONED

/ 71

not realize themselveswhat they have done, since they have
probably lost the memory of the stateof mind they havelost.
My nrst example is a lapsein a minor branch of engineer—
ing known astrafnc engineering or trafnc management. It is
a lapse of practical importance becauseit wastesthe time of
many drivers, contributes to pollution, wastesland and en—
ergy, and is the most active single cause of community de—
struction discussedin Chapter2.

Engineering has an honorable and long pedigree as a sci—
ence.Most of the sporadicevidencesof a scientincstateof
mind that go back to time immemorial arerevealedby featsof
engineering. In part, this is owing to the solidity and durabil—
ity of suchachievementsasthe Roman aqueducts,the pyra—
mids in Egypt and in what
is now Latin America, and the
domes, arches, and seawallsof classicalconstruction. Today
our safetyis constantly in the keeping of structural engineers,
aeronauticalengineers,electrical engineers,chemical engi—
neers, mechanical engineers, hydraulic engineers, and nuclear
engineers.We trust the scientincintegrity of thesepeople.If
we didn’t, we’d go crazyMany branchesof civil engineering
owe their startsto military engineering in the service of
mounting siegesor withstandingthem. This military strandin
the pedigree has contributed to the profession a proud touch
of unstinting, responsible,and even heroic service.

Given this enviable professional background, plus the eX—
treme tendency of North Americans to admire scientinc
achievement and give it the benent of
it is little
wonder that trafnc engineers have been trusted to do pretty
much as they please, and that departments of public works
havegratefullyacceptedandfollowed their recommendations
for designandspecincationsof streetsandroads.

the doubt,

72 / DARK AGE AHEAD

“It

looked spontaneous, but

In what traffic engineershavechosento do and haverec—
ommended, they have abandoned and betrayed scienceasit is
understood. “Engineering” also has an opprobrious connota—
tion of manipulationwithout regardfor truth, asin “engi—
neering consensus,” or
it was
engineered.”It is popularly assumedthat when universities
give sciencedegreesin traffic engineering, asthey do, they are
recognizing aboveboard expert knowledge. But
they aren’t.
They are perpetrating a fraud upon students and upon the
public when they award credentialsin this supposedexpertise.
In the mid—19505,I was one among thousandsof New York
citizenstrying to saveWashington Square,the major Greenwich
Villagecommunitypark,from bisectionby alimited—accesseX—
pressway,or reduction to a traffic circle by a circumferential ex—
pressway.After stavingoff both thesethreatsin sequence,our
community movement discarded its defensive stance and in—
sisted aggressivelythat a two—lanecarriage road bisecting the
square be closed to all but emergency traffic such as ambu—
lancesandfire trucks.We now sawthat this formerly harm—
lessrelic of the horse—and—buggyage was a potential Trojan
horsethat could be trotted out asaprecedentfor anykind of
road ruination of the park and community

When a test closing of

the carriage road became immi—

told us that

the traffic commissioner

traffic is like water:
nent,
if it is dammed up or diverted from its course in one place, it
will
find other outlets where it meets lessresistance.To close
off the carriage road without providing a new road would, he
predicted,inundateall the narrow streetsin the park’svicin—
ity with thwarted traffic and belching fumes, threatening the
safety of children to the point
that they couldn’t even reach
the park.He predictedthat we would come back to him on
our knees, begging for a road.

SCIENCE ABANDONED

/ 73

His dire predictionsdid not cometrue. Nowhere did traf—

fic increase.Indeed, traffic counts were slightly down in the
park’svicinity. The testclosingwassosuccessfulthat,without
more ado,it wasmadepermanent.

Where did the vanished traffic go? This was a new ques—

tion that emerged unexpectedly. But
it was not pursued. It
was ignored in favor of a vague notion that some drivers must
have chosen lessfrustrating routes, or else switched to public
transit; or maybe some oddballs walked.

More than thirty yearslater, my Toronto neighborhood
was divided over the question of how to frustrate drivers
who, to avoid the traffic lights on a main street, used a paral—
lel quiet street as a speedway,zipping unhindered by traffic
lights through intersections.Someresidentswantedto thwart
those drivers by changing the direction of the quiet street
(from one—waynorth to one—waysouth) on a block partway
up the route. Other residents, perhaps a majority,
feared that
thwarted traffic would inundate their nearby streets. Some
wanted nothing done, supposing that any attempted remedies
would make matters worse. Still others advocated elaborate
and expensivestudies of possibletraffic mazesthroughout
the
community; others were chastenedby the unfortunate expe—
riences of a nearby neighborhood for which an elaborate
professionalstudy had been done, leaving everyonedissatis—
fied. People were getting very angry at one another. Accu—
satory petitions were bouncing around. Staff members of the
city’s traffic and public works departments were present at a
neighborhood meeting to offer advice. Our local elected
council memberwaspresent,keepinghis earto the ground.
To my astonishment, asthe meeting got under way, I heard
nom the professionalstaff the samelecture, almostword for
that
word,

that I had heard three decades earlier in New York:

74 / DARK AGE AHEAD

trafnc is like water and will nnd an outlet offering lessresis—
tance.If it is diverted or dammed it will
inundate other streets.
I thought sadly,“Here they are, another generation of
nice, miseducated young men, about to waste their careersin
a fake sciencethat caresnothing about evidence; that doesn’t
aska fruitful questionin the nrstplaceandthat, when unex—
pected evidence turns up anyhow, doesn’t pursue it; a science
that hasn’t been building up a coherent body of knowledge
that organizesits own direction by grace of the successionof
questions it opens.” Fortunately,
the public present at the
meeting cared about evidence. I described what had hap—
pened at Washington Square, and the community agreed to
testachangein streetdirection.The professionalstaffmadeit
clearthey didn’t like this decision,but the local councilman
picked up the idea of
the test and apparently overruled the
credentialed professionals.

Much the same thing happened as in New York. I don’t
know whether total trafnc counts dropped. No counts were
evidentlymade,or atleastreported.But no other streetswere
inundated by thwarted trafnc, and speeding trafnc wonder—
fully decreased on the rescued street, on which I
It
seemedto decreasethroughout the neighborhood.Dammed
trafnc did not overnow into channels of
less resistance; it was
successfullyconnned to its appointed channel.Again, the water
hypothesis to explain trafnc now had been discredited by the
real world. But once again, reasonswhy it was wrong were
not investigated.

live.

However, at long last, other people in the world noticed

that unexpectedevidencewasturning up. My brother, a re—
tired chemicalengineer,sentme a clipping from the February
16, 1998, issue of Chemical8Engineermg News about a study

SCIENCE ABANDONED

/ 75

had analyzed—for

reportedin TheNew Scientist.A researchteam at University
London Transport and
College, London,
Britain’s Department
Transport, and the
Regions—sixty cases,worldwide,
in which roads had been
closedor their carryingcapacityreduced.The principal find—
ing of the study was forthrightly reported:

the Environment,

of

. . .

The study team.

to move elsewhere.

Planners’modelsassumethat closing a road causesthe traf—
fic using it
. .
found that computer models usedby urban transportation
planners yield incorrect answers.. . .
[W]hen a road is
closed,an averageof 20% of the traffic it carried seemsto
vanish. In some casesthey studied, as much as 60% of
the
traffic vanished.Most of the casesstudied involved urban
areas,but the sameargumentsmay apply awayfrom urban
at hand is a logical
areas, New Scientist reports. The report
extension to a 1994 finding that building new roadsgen—
erates traffic.
that’s the case, “then the closure of roads is
bound to cause less traffic,” according to London—based
transport consultant Keith Buchan.

If

The item added, mentioning no further

investigation or
“traffic vanishes because commuting habits
Flexibility helps people cope with road
. . . suggestthat government should stop

evidence, that
are so variable.
closures.
worrying about causingvehicular congestionby pedestrian—
izing sites.”

. . .
Experts

. . .

Thwarted drivers again,making choices.How do traffic
engineersknow that, or think that they do? This incurious
profession pulls its conclusions about the meaning of evi—
dence out of thin air—sheer guesswork—even when it does

76 / DARK AGE AHEAD

deign to notice evidence.By the time I readthis clipping, I
had begun to wonder whether missing trafnc—meaning cars
and their occupants—actually did vanish or if, instead, only
someof their travelingon the roadsvanished.The repeated
phenomenon of vanished trafnc suggestedthat possibly some
characteristicscommon to the closed roadsthemselves,rather
than the drivers on the roads, might account for vanished
trafnc.Not an answerto the mystery,but perhapsworth in—
vestigating.

I am in no position to do trafnc research. I don’t drive,
nor do I own a car. I have no little cables that will
register
eachtime a car runs over their piece of roadway.In recent
years I have had a disability that prevents me from walking a
distance.When I go to a destination in downtown Toronto,
I take a taxi. But, as luck would have it, a taxi has turned
for helping me indulge my
out
curiosity.

to be an admirable tool

When I travel from the airport

to a downtown microdes—
tination, one part of the trip can be along an elevated,limited—
accesshighway on the southern perimeter of downtown,
betweenthe city andLake Ontario. The highwayhasseveral
on—and off—ramps,feeding from and into the city’s grid of
streets.

On my way, I watch the taxi meter clicking and counting.
Along the expresswaystretch, the trip seemseconomical. I am
getting quite a bit of distance for my money. Then I hit a
choke point at an exit ramp, and from then on everything
changes.The rest of my trip is very expensive.Considering
what it is costing me, I am getting very little distance.I am not
complaining about this. As research,it is economical.What
worries me, rather, is the expensive burden on the city, and

SCIENCE ABANDONED

/ 77

the planet,of the airpollution andurbanroadcongestionthat
the expensivepart of my trip is registering.

The driver must weave circuitously around a block,

then
around another block, and so on,
to reach the correct side of
the correctblock of the correctstreeton which to depositme.
All the way to my micro—destination,nom the moment we
enter the street grid nom the ramp, we are surrounded by de—
livery vans, other taxis, and private carswhose drivers are also
circuitously attempting to reachtheirmicro—destinations.Drivers
who must park their cars while they attend a meeting, get a
tooth nlled, call on a customer, or attend to other downtown
businessgo throughanextracrawlto reachagarageor parking
spot; so much the worse for them. Our joint circuitous con—
gestion hampers all the others attempting to make use of the
streets:public transit vehicles, pedestrians,bicycle couriers.

In vain, I long to leave the taxi and walk directly to my

destination.The taxi cantravelonly indirectly.I mollify my—
self with the knowledge that my situation informs me of the
identicalsituationof driverswith packagesor courieredmail
to deliver or carsto stash.Everyone in a vehicle hasbecome a
prisoner of the grid and the limited andindirect accessto it
in this exasperating system.How different it is from the free
and convenient downtown grid I experienced when I could
walk and could get unlimited accessinto it at everycorner,
not merely at arbitrary choke points.

It dawnedupon me atlength that two separate,major mis—

conceptions were buried in this mess.

Misconception One is expressedin the elevated limited—
accesshighway and its ramps, whose designers should have
askedthemselves,“How can we help this great diversityof
users reach their great diversity of micro—destinationsmost

78 / DARK AGE AHEAD

directly?” Instead,they apparently askedthemselves,“How can
people reach a macro—destination,downtown, most speedily?”
When my taxi entersthe downtown grid from the north

or west, which are not furnished with limited—accessexpress—
ways,my trip within the downtown is so much more eco—
nomical
than when I enter the grid from the expresswayat
the south that the entire trip is more economical despite my
avoidance of
the small expresswaystretch. How ironic that
the ambitious, elevated behemoth of an expresswayand its
land—wastingrampsare counterproductivefor drivers using
the downtown.
It would be a wonder if closing a road de—
signedto expressMisconception One didn’t resultin at least
a20 percentreductionin vehiculartravelwithout a singleve—
hicle actuallyvanishing.

Misconception Two is expressedin the No LEFTTURN,No
STANDING(during busy hours), and ONEWAY,ONEWAY,and ONE
WAYsigns,theimpedimentsforcingmy driverall aroundRobin
Hood’s barn to reach a micro—destination.These impediments
were contrived to keep vehicles out of one another’sway and
thus carry out
the theme of a speedy trip. What a dream—
world!
It would be a wonder if reducing these impediments
didn’t reduce congestion further after Misconception One’s
error was eliminated. One American mayor,John Norquist of
Milwaukee, has made a start with such an experiment by
eliminating one—waystreets; he calls his city’s popular pro—
gram friendly driving.

The chief impediment

in the double—barreledmessis ob—
viously acherishedparadigm.In effect,somebodytold trafnc
engineers and road designersthat thejourney mattersmorethan
the destination—aninappropriate analogy about a philosophi—
cal approachto life—and they believedit. In the background

SCIENCE ABANDONED

/ 79

of this paradigmI seelittle boyswith toy carshappily mur—
muring “Zoom, Zooom, Zooooomf’

touches—damaging community life; wasting time,

The factthat universitystudentsin this so—calleddiscipline
arenot informed of evidence that haslong been availabletells
us that such evidence is uncongenial
to their teachers. The
cherishedbut deformedparadigmispoisonthat harmsevery—
thing it
energy,and land; polluting air; and vitiating the indepen—
dence of countries with large oil reserves.This is alsoa “per—
fect” example of antiscience masquerading as the science it
has betrayed: first
it went wrong with a fruitless question
basedon misconceptionof purpose;a wrong hypothesisfol—
lowed; next came ignored evidence; when the evidence
could no longer be ignored,
it was not seen as opening up
further questions, and that failure killed off the traffic enter—
prise asa coherent, expanding body of knowledge.

In the meantime, each year students have poured forth
from universities, a clear, harmful
case of education surren—
dered to credentialism. One wonders at the docility of the stu—
dents who evidently must be satisfied enough with the
credentials to be uncaring about the lack of education. The
credentialsmayindeedbe agoodinvestmentfor them but are
not a good investment for society. That anxious parent at the
forum (p.48) was well advised to worry about change in uni—
versity education.

The next example demonstrates how even one wrong turn—
ing in the scientific stateof mind—in this case,the wrong
choice of an investigative strategy—can betray science.

Three great scientistsin the nineteenth century laid the
foundations of all modern public health measures. I have

8o / DARK AGE AHEAD

alludedto two of them alreadyin this chapter:LouisPasteur,
a chemist and bacteriologist
in Paris; and Dr. John Snow, a
physicianand pathologist in London, who discoveredthat
cholera infection spread through contaminated drinking
water. Snow noticed that the high diseaseand death ratesof a
district
in central London coincided with a particular water
source, the Broad Street pump.

To makesurehis hypothesiswassolid,Snowtrackeddown
every seeming anomaly (casesturning up elsewhere; an even—
tual drop in mortality rates) and accounted factually for the
connection of each to the Broad Street drinking water, thus
renderingorderfrom confusion.His work is ascientincclassic,
not only for itsimportant discoverybut alsofor hismeticulous
compiling of evidence.When he presentedthe evidenceto
governmental authorities in London,
they instantly removed
the handle from the Broad Street pump and the epidemic
halted. Snow’s hypothesis was immediately tested by the real
world and validated.

The third of thesegeniuseswasDr. EdwardJenner,who no—
ticed that Englishmilkmaidswho contractedcowpox,a mild
disease,escapedthe ravagesof smallpox. He hypothesized that
the mild form of the diseasemust be a protection againstthe
virulent
form. This suggestedthe idea of a protective vaccine,
which not only broughtsmallpoxundercontrolby vaccination
but alsolaid the foundation for many other types of protective
vaccines and, eventually, for knowledge of
immune systems.
Jenner mentally compared individuals who had contracted
cowpoxwith thosewho hadnot. All modern statisticalmeth—
ods in which individuals are matched againstsimilar individu—
als,some of whom are given placebosand others of whom are
given whatever substanceor treatment is being investigated,are

SCIENCE ABANDONED

/ 81

derivedfromJenner’sbrilliant observationof individualdiffer—
ences and his detective work in identifying the salient differ—
ence.This is how researchershaveidentined vitamin—denciency
diseases,and how new medicines are tested on human beings
afternrstbeingtestedon animals.It is how informed conclu—
sionsarereached about the value of testsfor detecting cancers
at early stagesof suspectgrowths.

Both methods—thosecomparing environments,as Dr.
Snow did, and those comparing individuals, as Dr. Jenner
did—are valuable researchtools when used appropriately.
Either is worthless when used inappropriately—the point of
my next exampleof alarming abandonmentof a scientinc
stateof mind.

In the summer of 1995, Chicago endured a vicious heat
wave, compounded by high humidity and high ozone levels.
In the week of July 14—July20, more than a thousand pa—
tients in excessof the usual number for that period were ad—
mitted to hospitals because of heatstroke, dehydration, heat
exhaustion,kidney failure, or electrolytic imbalances.Heat—
strokevictims often sufferedpermanentdamage;manyothers
were successfullytreatedin hospitalemergencyrooms.Hun—
dredsdied beforearriving at hospitals.

Deaths in Chicago during the week were 739 in excessof

thosein atypical hot summerweek—too manyfor the med—
ical examiner’s ofnce to handle. A local meat—packervolun—
teered his neet of refrigerated trucks in which to store bodies
until the overworkedstaff of the medical examinerand his
volunteers could perform autopsiesand certify causesof death.
But eventhe truck neetcouldn’t keepup with the innux of
corpses,which were predominantly those of poor, elderly
people.

82 / DARK AGE AHEAD

televisions,

Overloadedelectric—powertransformersfailed, rendering
air conditioners,
radios, and elevators in some dis—
tricts useless.Elderly residentsof high—rises,including high—
rent buildings, had to be carried down from their stining
apartments.Doubled use of water, as sweltering children
openedstreethydrants,led to lossesof waterpressure,leaving
some buildings without water for days.

Immediately before the heat wave began, meteorologists
warned residentsto use air conditioners, drink plenty of water
each day,and seekcool places,indoors or outdoors, in which
to relax. The most appalling circumstance was that large num—
bers of the elderly dead were found in apartments that were
infernallyhot, with windowscoveredanddoorslocked.Some—
times thesepeoplehad refusedhelp from worried neighbors
and failed to seekrefuge in air—conditionedstores.

After the heat wave ended, a large researchteam from the
US. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
moved in, to seewhat could be discovered to prevent similar
disastersin the future. The researcherscarefullypaired each
deadindividual with anotherwisesimilarsurvivorof the heat
wave.The matching survivor was from a randomly chosen
location. This swift and Herculean effort by eighty re—
searchers,their supervisors, and the high—powereddesigners
of the studywasworthless,becauseit turned up only what
everybody already knew, including the meteorologists who
had issuedthe earlywarnings.Thosewho died had run out
of water, had no air—conditioning,
rooms
to find cool refuge, and were not successfullychecked up on.
Indeed,
the researchers’ findings were worse than useless.
Survivorsdifferedin havingsuccessfullykept cool. The find—
ings were misleading because they encouraged blaming the

leave their

did not

SCIENCE ABANDONED

/ 83

after all,

they hadn’t

themselves. The
victims;
New Englandjournal ofMedicinedignined these discoveries by
publishing them, with no criticism of
the inappropriate
methodology.

looked after

not

In contrast, a young sociology graduate student from New
York named Eric Klinenberg took a different approach to the
question. He was a native of Chicago, and he noticed that
some areasof the city had considerablyhigher death rates
than other areas.His thinking was derived from the type of
detective work employed by Dr. Snow He did pair—matching
too, but of communities,
individuals. He chose ashis pair
two districts with similar or identical microclimates and sim—
ilar proportions of elderly people living alone. The big differ—
Lawndale and South
ence between his two districts, North
Lawndale, was that
the heat—wave death rate in North Lawn—
dale was 40 fatalities per 100,000 population, while right next
the death rate was fewer than 4 per
door,
100,000.Klinenberg thought this wasa discrepancyworth look—
ing into. His observations,demographic and historical inquiries,
and information from interviews with elderly survivors and
othersin both districtsarereportedandanalyzedin hisbook,
Heat VVaoe,subtitled A SocialAutopsy ofDisasterin Chicago.Un—
like the CDC study, it summarizes much that nobody knew
about the contrastingbehaviorof elderly people in the two
areasand the everyday,practical reasonsfor their differing be—
havior in time of crisis.

in South Lawndale,

In North Lawndale, where the death rate was so high, el—
derly people were not accustomed to walking in their district
becausethere was almost nothing for them to walk to. It was
a commercial and social desert, almost devoid of stores and
other gathering places.Old people were thus unacquaintedwith

84 / DARK AGE AHEAD

to leave their apartments,

storekeeperswho could welcome them into air—conditioned
for fear
space. They were afraid, too,
thesewould be burglarized while they were out. For the same
reason, they feared strangerswho came to check on them. In
the crisis they were behaving asthey always did in this place
with no functioning community. That was perhaps Klinen—
berg’s most horrifying discovery

In South Lawndale,where a much higher proportion of
the elderly survived, everything was diametrically different.
Therethe elderlywereaccustomedto walking outside.There
were plenty of placesfor them to go on the district’s bustling,
crowded streets.They knew storekeepersand had no hesita—
tion about hanging around in their air—conditionedspaces,
where they alsohad accessto water.They felt secureabout
leavingtheir apartments,andthey trustedthosewho cameto
check on them, some of whom they knew asacquaintances.
In the crisisthey were behavingmuch asthey alwaysdid in
this place with a lively, functioning community.

Klinenberg searchedbeneaththe surface,to find the his—
torical reasonsfor these diametric differences.Everything
tracedbackto extremedifferencesin densityof populationin
the two districts. North Lawndale had lost most of its former
residents to the suburbs, and they had not been replaced by
Its former industries had rapidly relocated else—
immigrants.
where or had closed down. The district was full of vacant
lots. The population wastoo thin to supportcommerce,and
therefore was sensibly shunned by newcomers to the city In
contrast, South Lawndale had remained densely enough oc—
cupied to staybusy and to attract newcomers—so many new—
comers that housing was in short supply, a disadvantagethat
wasminor comparedwith the emptinessof North Lawndale.

SCIENCE ABANDONED

/ 85

Klinenberg also turned up many interesting nuancesabout
the city’s disasterplanning. For instance,its organizationsof so—
cialworkershadbeenstrippedof personnelin the interestsof
savingmoney,with the ideathatpoliceandnremencouldtake
on socialworkers’ tasksin caseof emergency.The city assumed
thatpolice andfiremenhadbeentrainedin suchtasksbecause
disasterplanners had ordered it done. This was an exercisein
what is calledreinventinggovernment,making governments
behavelike profit—consciousbusinesses.The training of police
and nremen to behave like social workers didn’t
take because,
Klinenberg noticed, all along the line, nom supervisors and
chiefs down to new rookies, social work connicted too much
with the police and firemen’s profoundly macho ethos.

It

is not reassuring to know that the US.

federal agency
entrusted with so vital a responsibility asdiseasecontrol
is so
insensitive about the question it asked itself in Chicago and
the inappropriatestrategyit chosefor its research.But I have
not told this tale simply to upbraid the CDC for its stupidity
in this case, or even to show how much more fruitful one re—
searchercan be than eighty when that one has not made up
his mind in advance about what he expects to find and the
eighty—with their questionnaires about air—conditioning and
refuge—seekingand going outdoors—have.

the members of

I am interested in those eighty researchersand what they
were thinking. I believe it is important to find this out. I am re—
minded of
the board of directors of Enron,
the disgraced energy—tradingcompany that collapsed after a
carnivalof accountingnauds.When directorswerequestioned
by Congress about their acquiescencein these shenanigans,
some saidthey had individually had their doubts but had sup—
pressedthem, to avoid being at odds with their colleagues.

86 / DARK AGE AHEAD

Now, asto those eighty researchers.Among any eighty
knowledgeable Americans, at least a few arelikely to be skep—
tical and intelligent, often very much so.That is my experi—
ence of Americans, which has been considerable.
I think the
fruitful question to be askedhere is why all eighty behaved as
if they hadapressingmissionto learnwhether air condition—
ers and water are good for combating heat. Were they so
wedded to the statisticalmethod derived from Dr. Jenner’s
detective work with smallpox that they were ignorant of the
history of Dr. Snow’swork on environmental health hazards?
Did they know how to identify a dangerous environment? A
fatal environment? Were any of them potential Klinenbergs,
so to speak?If so,why didn’t they object to the inappropriate
investigative strategy? What would have happened if
they
did? Would their intelligent
input have been respected?Or
would they have been regarded aspariahs and troublemakers?
What did they themselvesthink would happen?Had their su—
pervisors been selected becauseof impressive credentials?Or
for knowledge, wisdom, and courage?These things go to the
heart of the abandonment of science and the scientinc state
of mind—a catastrophe we simply can’t let happen if
it can
be stemmed and reversed.

Were thesepeople awed at being part of the exalted CDC?
Did they do their work cynically? We had better find out
what went wrong, whatever it may be. It is not far—fetchedto
speculatethat our own livesmay dependon the intelligence
and courage of these people or people like them—and, more
that the ability of our culture to survive may de—
important,
pend on them or peoplelike them.

Are the great gifts to our culture by Jenner, Snow, and
other scientific geniusesto be frittered away?The culture

SCIENCE ABANDONED

/ 87

doeshavepeoplelike Klinenberg.Surelyheisnot reallyalone
(I hope). What he discovered may not be heeded or acted
upon. It probablywon’t be.He himself recognizedthat effec—
tive change would cost money and time, with nothing to
show off before the next election. But at least he spoke up
with nesh truths drawn from the real world, and that
is a be—
ginning. If that is lost, all is lost.

My third and final example of abandonment of the scientific
state of mind involves the mysterious materializing of jobs,
which has the esthetic merit of symmetry with the mysteri—
ousvanishingof trafnc;otherwise,the two mysteriesbearno
relationshipto eachother exceptthat both aremet with ob—
stinate refusal to examine the evidence—in the caseof
the
job mystery, refusal by incurious economists.

During the year 2002,

the economic entity called the
Greater Toronto Area (GTA)—nicknamed the Golden Horse—
shoe—has enjoyed a boom that economists said at
first
couldn’t be happeningand then “shouldn’t” be happening.
But it did happen.The reasonthat it “shouldn’t” havebeen
happening is that Canada’seconomic growth is supposedlyled
by exports; the United Statestakes85 percent of Canada’sex—
ports, and the United Stateswas in a recession,and so exports
nom Canadaweredown. Canada’seconomyisindeedheavily
dependent on export salesto the United States,but that isn’t
the entire economic picture.

The first official

tidings of

the anomaly arrived in April,

when StatisticsCanadarevealedthat the country hadacquired
more than 200,000 net additional jobs during the first quarter
of
the year, while America had acquired none. By June, the
financial papers were daring to write of a roaring economy,

88 / DARK AGE AHEAD

“signincantlyoutperforming our major trading partner.” In
July, with news that “Canada” had added a “stunning 66,400
[morenet]jobs” in Junewhile the United Stateshadsuffereda
net lossof 150,000nonfarmjobs sofar during the year,emi—
nent economistsconsultedby the mediacould offerno expla—
nations. But at least they were admitting,
finally, that it was
happening. “Six months agowhen StatisticsCanadareleasedits
Januaryemploymentreport, the [economic]forecastingcom—
munity wondered whether the numbers were somehow incor—
rect,” afinancial columnist reported. “But now, with six months
of data, economists areno longer doubters.

It’s for real.”

The reasonI’ve put “Canada” in quotation marksin the
paragraphaboveis that a large part of the country is eco—
nomically stagnantor declining, and to understandwhat is
going on behind national statisticson jobs, one must know
where the jobs are being added or lost. It never happens
amorphously, in the country asa whole. Everything that hap—
pens in the world happens at some place.

. . .

My guesswas that the jobs were being added specifically in
the GTA and that they were materializing becausethe area
was experiencing a signincant episode of city import replac—
ing, a processin which companies typically begin providing
bits and pieces of producers’ goods and services that were
formerly imported. This processis led neither by export sales
nor by salesto consumers. It is led only by perceived oppor—
tunity. Sincesuchjobs don’t fit into economists’preconcep—
tions of how economies behave, they don’t recognize these
jobs asrespectableevidence of economic expansion, and thus
fail to recognizethe process.

A number of cluessuggestedcity import replacing.First
were bits of anecdotalevidencefrom manufacturersin the

SCIENCE ABANDONED

/ 89

Toronto area that, yes, they were purchasing locally various
items that they formerly had to import;
the Canadian
dollar wasgently rising in value,which is exactlywhat hap—
pens during significant city import
replacing. And third, Sta—
tistics Canada,
wascurrently the fastestgrowing “city” in Canada.

in an unrelated release, reported that Vaughan

second,

And I know personally of a machine maker in another small
GTA town that hasbeen bought asa subsidiary by a large fac—
tory in Mississauga,also in the GTA, specifically to supply
needswhich that factoryformerly met throughimports.

Vaughan is a suburb directly acrossthe street nom Toronto,
at the northernmost border of the city. It is a subdivision of a
larger suburb named Woodbridge, which in turn is a political
subdivisionof a suburbanand exurban sprawl calledYork.
Vaughanhasmany gated, expensivehousing tracts, along with
the usual suburban complement of shopping malls.Except for
a tiny heart of shopsaround a public squarealong with a large
apartment house, at the center of Woodbridge, where one ac—
tually seeshumanbeingswalking, there is nothing physically
resemblingacity.But theheart,includingthe apartmentbuild—
ing andascatteringof old housesleft overfrom the time when
this was a country town, is humanly scaled,pleasant,and phys—
ically welcoming. Two of my neighbors and I decided to drive
up to Vaughanon a beautifulautumn Saturdayand seewhat
changeshad been going on there.

The big changeswereVaughan’shuge new suburbanfac—
tory parks, each filled with dozens of new, and mostly hand—
some,buildings,rathersmallasfactoriesgo, eachannouncing
its specialty,suchastool and die making or injection mold—
ing. Most impressivewerethe clustersof new factories,cheek
that were providing construction components. Some
by jowl,

90 / DARK AGE AHEAD

clusterswereformedby companiesspecializingin variousmetal
or glasscomponents, or items combining those two materi—
als.Other clusters, in different factory parks, were devoted to
all manner of construction components in wood. Still an—
other, smaller cluster featured textiles.

Neither I nor my two companions arepersonally equipped
to gather the important economic information that an episode
of city import replacing merits—such aswhat items were
those with which the episode started; what was the previous
history of companies engaged in the process;what new de—
partures have been most and least successful;what arethe ad—
vantagesto customerswho formerly imported the items:
Lower cost? Time savings?Convenience? Closer adherence
to desired specifications? If not these, then what? Where did
the necessarycapital come from? Had any of the new compa—
nies yet begun to export, aswell asto supply GTA enterprises?
And wheredid the workersholding thesenew manufacturing
jobs live? (Obviously not in the mansions in the new gated
housing tracts.) It being a Saturday,since the three of us work
weekdays too, the new factories were closed and we didn’t
encounter anyone in the factory parks, nor did we speakwith
anyone else, with one exception that
I will mention later.
This is a thoroughly car—dependentsuburb, the kind of place
where one must drive and park to pick up a loaf of bread or
a bottle of vanilla. But at least we could seewhat was plainly
in front of our eyes.

The second fastest—growingcity in Canada at present is
Brampton,which is largerandolder thanVaughan,but is also
asuburbin the GreaterTorontoArea.It ranksbehindVaughan
in growth only becauseStatisticsCanadalikes putting these

SCIENCE ABANDONED

/ 91

mattersin percentagesandBrampton hasbeengrowing from
a much larger basethan Vaughan" In absolute terms, Bramp—
ton’s growth is the greater. From May 2001 to December
2002, Brampton’s population increased by 27,000, reaching
352,000. Its net jobs increased by 3,500 in 2001 and another
3,500 in 2002, on top of a 4,000 increase in 2000.
In 2002
it was second in Canada only to the City of Toronto in value
of building permits issued.While Brampton is a suburb,it
is not a bedroom community.
It has an unusually large, at—
tractive, and urban core, employing more than five thousand
people in shops and servicesmainly originated in Brampton,
not as chain stores or
Its new residents, as for
many yearspast, include large contingentsfrom India and
from the poor regionsof Canada,especiallyNewfoundland,
followed (in this order) by smaller contingents from Britain,
Portugal, Guyana, Italy, the Philippines, Trinidad and Tobago,
Pakistan, and Poland. The population includes 40 percent
(about 141,000 individuals) classified by Statistics Canada as
“visible minorities,” predominantly from South Asia. Bramp—
ton makesa deliberateeffort to retainits immigrants,attach—
ing them firmly to the community by its quality of life, its
schools, and its opportunities in the arts, professions, entre—
preneurship, and employment. About half of Brampton’s
job—holdingresidentswork in Brampton, another quarter
in nearby suburbs (including Vaughan); the other quarter

franchises.

*Such percentagesare ill—conceivedfor useful information. A hamlet that
grows from six people to twelve and addsone newjob to a former singlejob
would be the fastest—growingplace in both population and jobs in a given
year, unlessanother hamlet exceeded 100 percent. And if a household in such
a hamlet addeda porch, that could register asan impressivepercentagegain in
building permits.

92 / DARK AGE AHEAD

commute to the City of Toronto. Brampton has one of
the lowest crime rates in Canada, and it may be one of
the
country’smost cosmopolitanand economicallysophisticated
communities.

Most Brampton jobs are in manufacturing (of all kinds,

ranging from low—techfood processing,bottling, and auto—
mobile assemblyto high—techrobotics, pharmaceutical chem—
istry,andengineeringof automotiveengineparts).Mostjobs
are in the hundreds of acres of
industrial parks located be—
tween the Toronto international airport to the south and res—
idential and downtown Brampton to the north. So much is
occurring simultaneously in Brampton’s vast manufacturing
economy—expansion of some companies, contraction of
others,new exporting work, new investment,and so on—
that the trees threaten to get lost in the woods.

However, when I asked Dennis Cutajar, director of

the
Brampton businessdevelopment department, about import—
replacementjobs specincally,he pointed out that most facto—
ries in the industrial parksnow include officesthat front on
the industrialparks’main roads.Formerlythesefactorieswere
devotedexclusivelyto manufacturingandits industrialancil—
lary facilities, such as transportation, warehousing, and stor—
age. But beginning in the 1980s, he said, a new trend has
emerged: executives are now locating their headquarters as
close aspossibleto the factory noor, the spacewhere produc—
tion takesplace.With the executivescome otherjobs: in ad—
research, engineering, design, and marketing,
ministration,
very good jobs, using high levels of skill. These changes in
corporateorganizationgiveBrampton servicesthat werefor—
merly located in downtowns elsewhereand imported into
Brampton.He estimatesthat about ten thousandof Bramp—

SCIENCE ABANDONED / 93

ton’s net new jobs are corporate headquartersjobs, many lo—
cated in former factory buildings. One begins to understand
why Brampton (Vaughan,too) lackssuburbanofnceparksand
clustersof downtown ofncetowers.One alsobeginsto un—
derstand why high vacancy rates have persisted in recently
built ofncetowersin downtown Toronto in spiteof rent re—
ductions, and why some older ofnce buildings there and in
other largecitieshavebecomeavailablefor suchusesascon—
dominiums and live—work spacesfor self—employedpeople.
The tenants that made possible the imposing skyscraperland—
the world’s downtowns have begun nnding other
scapesof
landscapesto populate. Mr. Cutajar sayshe now observesthe
trend is affectingnnancialofnces,asexecutivesmove corpo—
rate headquarters of banks,
to what used to be
their cheap,outlying backofncesfor checkclearingandother
routine production activities. Cost reductions for space, he
said,haveapparentlybecomemore attractivethan the geo—
graphical proximity of bank headquarters to one another and
to the corporate law nrms and the national or multinational
nrmswith which they transactbusiness—whichhavealready,
themselves,dispersedout of the towering downtownsof the
old economy.To help prepareits populationfor the ingenuity
and knowledge economy, Brampton has helped nnance a
campusof Sheridan College Institute of Technology and Ad—
vanced Learning to educate workers in manufacturing skills.
Many workersin the new corporateofnceslearnedtheir skills
in computer—aideddesign or graphics, or as science techni—
ciansand administrators, at Sheridan.

for example,

When headquartersjobs shift from downtown Toronto to
the movement is not import replacement because
Brampton,
the metropolitan areainvolved is one economic entity. But

94 / DARK AGE AHEAD

when they shift from distantcitiesor other countries,asalso
happens, it is import replacement.

Cheaper space doesn’t mean Spartan space. The onices
convertednomformer factorybuildingscanbe stunning.The
one I examined was that of Nortel, where a niend of mine
from Sri Lanka who works there showed me around. N ortel is
a Canadian—originatedmultinational corporation that makes
cables and switching equipment
for the Internet and other
communications systems.The architects—a New York firm—
who convertedsomeof Nortel’s factory buildings to head—
quarters offices made imaginative use of the factory skylights
andthe opportunitiesthey gavefor placingsmallgardens,high—
lighting artworks,andgivingcharacterandidentityto function—
ally different sorts of spaces(lounges, conferencerooms,
workstations,and corridors). Progressingthrough the large
noor, one alsocatchesglimpsesof external vistasat ground level.
At Nortel
these include fountains and ponds where Canada
geeseareraising goslings.Ofnce spacein towers is ascetic,even
though more expensive,in comparisonwith what can be
wroughtfrom former factorybuildings.

At N ortel,

the most expensive, state—of—the—artoffice chairs
are those designed by Herman Miller
in New York, which
are advertisedin TheNew Yorker.I was struck alsoby the more
modest but sturdy, comfortable, and elegant painted wood—
compound and steel—rodchairs in the big dining area, to
which office workersbring take—outfood andhome—packed
lunches. They were unlike usual furniture. Turning a chair
upside down for a clue to its provenance, I found a label re—
porting “Made in Canada”;probablymore import replacing.
I can imagine these chairs becoming favorites among upscale
consumers, for dining and side chairs.When I mentioned this

SCIENCE ABANDONED / 95

to Mr. Cutajar, he said that a recent analysishe has made of
Brampton products shows that furniture has become one of
the nve product categories most rapidly growing in value. A
prowl among offices in industrial parks might suggestfurther
grist for import replacing and innovation.

The most conspicuous building in all of Brampton is a
little Victorian bandshell more than a century old, in Gage
Park at the heart of downtown. When the parkland was given
to Brampton at the turn of
the twentieth century, the deed
stipulated that if the bandshell were ever demolished, the land
must revert to the Gage family estate.There the beautifully
maintained,jewellike bandstandsits,the frivolous guardianof
a lovely and intact park on the most valuablereal estatein
Brampton.It is encircledby a summerpromenadethat in the
long winters becomes a winding public rink for pleasureskat—
ing. The bandshell insists loudly, but with good humor,
Brampton
and is humane. True, but all is not sweetnessand enlighten—
ment in Brampton.

that
its own history,

is unique, has its own character,

The placehasahugeproblem:trqnnc.The mayor,SusanFen—

nell, is awarethat traffic must be greatly alleviated, and soon,
and that more roads and interchanges are not the answer.She
makes the point repeatedly and publicly that people must get
out of their privatecarsandinto public transitvehicles;sheis
aware that to make this happen, public transit must provide
faster service, extended hours, extended routes, and low fares.
Brampton Transit works hard to deliver, plowing earningsback
into those aims, but the slow progressmakes painful reading:
“Route 3, midday service improved from every 60 minutes to
Evening trips extended by two, operating
every 30 minutes
. . . route 15, the 40—minutemidday frequency is
till 8 pm.

. . .

96 / DARK AGE AHEAD

. . .

changedto a 30—minutefrequency.
Route 50, a new route,
operateson a 60—minutefrequency during AM and PM rush
.” But angry town meet—
hours, Monday through Friday
ings on the horrors of traffic congestiondo not addressthe
point that the mayor makes;or, at any rate, the newspapers’re—
ports of the meetings sayonly what they have been reporting
for many decades—that the public demands more and wider
roads.The reports may be true, more’s the pity.

. .

To me, the most astonishingaspectof this economic expansion
is the continued inability of Canadian economists to credit
what is right in front of their eyesif they would only look. As
the months of 2002 rolled on, with headlines about Canada’s
mysterious“job creation machine” and an economy that
“beats analysts’expectations,” the economists consulted by the
media—people like the chief economist and assistantchief
economist of the Royal Bank of Canada,the senior economist
and senior capital markets strategistof the Toronto—Dominion
Bank, the chief economist of J. P.Morgan Securities Canada,
the currency strategistof Citigroup, New York, and the chief
economist of Merrill Lynch Canada—expresseda consensus
that the phenomenon must be “consumer led” by people’sad—
ditional demandsfor housesand cars.To be sure,asalwayshap—
penswhen desirablenew jobs areplentiful, people were buying
more housesand cars,just asthey were buying more orange
juice and shoes.This is a “multiplier effect,”long familiar in
economics, but to cite it does not explain how consumers have
earnedsufficientlymoremoneyto exertthiseffect.Economists
understand this. Yet, when compelled to abandon, reluctantly,
their standardbabble about export—ledeconomic life, they
soughtrefugein aconsumer—ledexplanationwhich theythem—

SCIENCE ABANDONED / 97

selvesmusthavebeenawarewashollow,both theoreticallyand
in view of the evidence itself, had they looked at the evidence,
which apparentlythey did not. Certainly,consumerscan en—
rich themselvesby borrowing on innatedhousevalues,and
they had been doing so (seep. 31), but US. homeowners have
been taking even greater advantage of
these windfalls than
Canadians,so some additional expansion processhashad to be
operating in Canada.
For the first half of

the year 2002, Canada added 460,000

an economy

net new jobs, while in the sameperiod the United States
ten times the size of
added only 5,000, with
Canada’s. When August ngures came out
in November,
economistsbecamemorecomfortablethanthey hadbeen.Al—
thoughAugust’swastheeleventhconsecutivemonthlyjob gain,
the expansionwas small comparedwith July’s, and many of the
new jobs were part—time.Confident
forecastsemphasizedthat
economic sectorssuch asmining, logging, and agriculture,
important contributors to the country’s export
trade, were
declining, and forecasterslooked forward to the unseemly
economicbehaviorwinding down andending.Alasfor them.
When figures for November
they
showeda gain of 55,300 net new jobs. “Economistsfound
the strength of yesterday’sreport particularly shocking,” wrote
a businessreporter,

in December,

came out,

becauseCanada’sjob market had slowedin Septemberand
October as employment gains downshifted to part—time
positions at the expenseof full—time.That trend reversed
in November.
. . more than offsetting the drop in full—
time employment in the two prior months. “The labor
market
it sure

looked like it was getting a bit

tired, but

98 / DARK AGE AHEAD

. . .

woke up again in November,” said
[the] chief econo—
mist at the Royal Bank of Canada.“Canada’snumbers are
particularly ‘eye—popping’when comparedwith the United
Stateswhich yesterdayreported it lost afurther 40,000jobs
in November,”
“What can I say?” said
. . .
[the] senior economist at
[the investment firm] BMO
N esbitt Burns. “It’s nothing short of remarkable.”

[he] added.

lost

to memory,

Probably it will be forgotten,

like the
replacing that occurred in the early
episode of city import
1990s in Vancouver at a time when the rest of Canada,
in—
cluding Toronto, wasin recession.The Vancouvereventslid
by without being identined or studied,it seems.As for the
general public, it gets about asmuch enlightenment
from all
the professorsof economics it supports asfrom the professors
of traffic engineering.

It will be unfortunate if

this episode in the Greater To—
ronto Area sinks into oblivion. Here is a marvelous opportu—
nity for economicsteachersand their studentsto study a
significantly large, living, breathing event in the very process
of carrying on and, in due course, winding down. Perhapswe
would learn why these episodeshappen in so few Canadian
cities.

One of the besettingsinsof Americansis that they don’t
seem to think that any place outside the United Statesis to—
tally real;their curiosity about Canadaseemsalmostnonex—
to be interested
istent. But American
in this Canadian episode of
replacing, which may
help explainsomeof thejobs lost in the United States.More
important, they might learnwhy theseepisodeshavebecome
so infrequent in American cities, where they were once very
too (see Notes, p. 198);
common.

I have some ideas on that,

too, ought

economists,

import

SCIENCE ABANDONED / 99

however, reasonedbut undisciplined guessesare no substitute
for the rigors of genuine scientinc inquiry.

The combination of
the appearance of professional respect
for scientincrigor coupled with professionalcontempt for
scientincallyrigorous behavioris toxic, a poison that infects
more activities in North America than the few I havepointed
out here.It cripples foreign aid programs,pedagogy,and illegal—
drug policies, and it promotes dubious and harmful medical
treatmentfads,nutrition and other lifestyleadvice,and agri—
cultural recommendations.

Sciencehasalsobeenmakinglittle progressin dealingwith
whole systems;particularly in biology and medical treatment,
it tends to become arrested in the stage of singling out iso—
lated bits, with little grasp of how these interact with other
bits of
integrated systems.Very partial understanding com—
bined with typical scientincoverconndenceemboldensus to
accept mistakeswe would not otherwise accept.

Our culture hassurvived much bad sciencein the past,such
asphrenologyandclaimsthatmenwith darkskins,andwomen
of any hue, lack the intellectual capabilities of white men.
Why can’twe continuesurvivingbadscience?To peoplewho
didn’t venture more than a dozen miles nom home,
it didn’t
matter whether the world wasround or nat.Bad farming prac—
tices in the pastresultedin poor yields and depleted soils;today
chemical fertilizers, toxic sprays,and dosesof hormones and
antibiotics to livestock endanger not only soils but also the
health of farmers, farm laborers, consumers, and the environ—
ment. Modern life hasraisedthe ante of knowledge required in
everythingnom scienceto democraticparticipation.Failures
were alwaysstultifying; now they can be devastating.

If

the rot of bad science continues to spread, to be tolerated,

roo / DARK AGE AHEAD

and even to be rewarded by corporations and centrally ad—
ministered government grants, the heyday of scientinc and
technologicalachievementis inevitably drawing to its end in
North America.Try to imaginehow demoralizingthat dete—
rioration will be for a culture that almost worships science,
and that proudly connects its identity and prowess with sci—
entific and technological superiority. How will such a culture
and its people deal with becoming incompetent and back—
ward in science and science—basedtechnology?

A postscript about Vaughan, Brampton, and food: my com—
panions and I spend quite a lot of
time eating on our ex—
ploratory foraysinto the fringesof the GreaterTorontoArea.
This alwaysyields surprises.In Vaughan we happened upon a
lovely place selling delicious Italian ice cream in more than
fifty navors.The secretof its excellence is that the proprietor
always makes the gelato fresh—all those navorsl—the night
before he puts it on sale,and no navor is artificial. He told us
he had come from Sicily a few yearspreviously, and first es—
tablished his store and kitchen in North York, an undistin—
guished City of Toronto suburb adjoining Vaughan. There
the enterprise failed. One of my companions—the author
of guidebooks to economical Toronto restaurants—gavethe
proprietor well—informed suggestions of where,
in the city
the establishment would be likely to succeed. The
proper,
suggestions were appreciated by the proprietor, who made
notes because, he said, he and his backers were interested in
either franchisingor establishinga secondoutlet. Thus can
strangersin a city casuallyhelp one another. This gelato maker
is a fortunate and sensible man. He has pride in his product
and a nairfor enjoying his customersand his life. Eachyear,

SCIENCE

ABANDONED

/

IOI

he told us, he removes the chairs and tables from his outdoor
patio in December, and by Christmas closesthe shop and de—
partsfor Florida until March, when he reopensfor business.
Here’s a genuine consumer economic activity, but even so, it
lives on the multiplier effect of economic expansionfrom
other causes,which also supports its proprietor’s annual
three—monthsojourn in Florida.

In Brampton, we were charmed and well fed in a downtown

restaurantcalling itself a 1950sdiner. It is more handsomelyde—
signedandspaciousthana diner,but its menuincludesauthen—
tic 1950s diner
items, such as potato soup; Reuben, western,
and clubhouse sandwiches on white toast; and root beer ice—
cream sodas.The diner also appealsto nostalgic interest in car
andtruck designof the 1950s.The banquettewhereI satwas
nankedby the unbelievably vulgar and cumbersome fender of
a pink Cadillac. A display casecontains model carsand trucks
of that bygone time. A miniature McDonald’s truck is inno—
cent of golden arches; instead,
is emblazoned with the fif—
teen—centprice of its hamburgers. A tall cylindrical casewith
a revolving interior containspies with the highest, nuffiest
meringues I have ever seen.In this diner, clearly you wander
into somebody’s dream. The only way to enjoy it is to go to
Brampton and enjoy the rest of the downtown too.

it

CHAPTER

FIVE

Dumbed—Down

Taxes

Henri Pirenne tells us that the low point of the Dark Age that
followed Western Rome’s collapse occurred about the year
1000. After that, instead of sinking ever deeper into incom—
petent poverty, our ancestral culture slowly took a turn for
the better. Pirenne alsoanalyzeswhy and how culture’s trajec—
tory pivoted upward.The poor, backwardEuropeancities—
many of them, at the time, hardly more than embryos of cities,
with Venice leading the way and others following—began
trading with one another again and, indirectly through Ven—
ice, with the Middle East and Asia. The cities developed by
importing, creating, and exporting innovations. By trading and
mutually adopting innovations,
they slowly drew abreast of
advanced Asian cities and then surpassedthem in economic
and social capability and prosperity.

Disadvantaged in almost every way though they were, the
early medieval cities typically benented from subsidiarityand
nscalaccountability.

DUMBED—DOWN

TAXES

/

103

Subsidiarityis the principle that governmentworks best—
most responsibly and responsively—when it is closest to the
peopleit servesandthe needsit addresses.Fiscalaccountability
is the principle that institutionscollectinganddisbursingtaxes
work most responsiblywhen they are transparentto those
providing the money.

The cities of the Roman Empire had lost these advantages
in the desperateyears before the collapse, when the imperial
treasury extorted from them as much as it could and dis—
bursedthe money for schemesand needsaccordingto its
own, frequently crazed, priorities. The early medieval cities
regained the two principles slowly, in various ways. Some,
like London, received royal charters authorizing them to
farm (that is, collect) their own taxes. Others, like Hamburg
andcitiesof the Low Countries andnorthern France,gained
subsidiarity and nscal accountability through the efforts of
merchants and citizens united by common interests and then,
increasingly, by custom. Many others, like Venice itself, Flo—
rence, Bologna, and Genoa, achieved subsidiarity and nscal
accountability as by—productsof
their own sovereignty as
city—states.

Both principlesareimportant, but the needfor subsidiarity
hasbecome especiallyacute, for reasonsI shall sketchout later.
Yet both subsidiarity and fiscal accountability of public money
havealmost disappearedfrom the modern world, asif a cycle is
returning to the Roman imperium,
rather than to principles
that renewed Western culture long after Rome’s failure. Today,
over almost all the world, major taxes, including those most re—
munerativeandmost economicallyinformative, like income taxes
basedon ability to pay, or those directly renecting economic
expansion,like salesor value—addedtaxes,arecollectedeither
by sovereign governments or by their surrogates,provincial

104 / DARK AGE AHEAD

governments.This is true of federalgovernmentslike thoseof
the United States, Canada, Mexico, and Germany, and of cen—
tralized sovereignties like those of England, France, Sweden,
and Israel—to name a few of both types. The only exceptions
areafew city—stateslike Hong Kong andSingaporeandnear—
city—stateslike the Czech Republic (the city—stateof Prague),
Slovakia (the city—stateof Bratislava),and Taiwan (the city—state
of Taipei). Only very minor taxation, such asproperty taxes,
responsiveneither to ability to pay nor to economic expansion,
is typically permitted to cities.

Becausecity sourcesof public revenue are frequently inad—
equateto needs,so—calledsenior governmentssporadically
cometo their aid with grantsof public money andprograms
devisedfor using the grants.Theseresourcesare disbursed
into many different localities, currently in many different sit—
uations, with unlike needs and dissimilar opportunities. Sov—
ereign governmentscannot possibly be in intimate touch
with all this variation. Even with the best will
in the world,
the disbursersmust act asif common denominators exist, and
if
these cannot be found, will allow idiosyncratic needs and
opportunities to go unanswered. An example is a stillborn
hotel tax in Toronto. The numbers of tourists visiting the city
have declined since the late 1990s. The city has had virtually
no moneyfor marketingitself or its eventsastourist destina—
tions, so hotels in the city askedthe City Council
rooms modestlyto raisesuchfunds.When the city govern—
ment boldly passedthe requested tax, the provincial govern—
ment annulled the act; only the province could enact such a
tax, and only by making it a province—widepolicy Other ho—
telsin the province,most notably in Windsor, a virtual sub—
urb of Detroit acrossthe river, vigorously resisted the tax, in

to tax hotel

DUMBED—DOWN

TAXES

/

105

the caseof Windsor on the reasonablegrounds that it wouldn’t
help that city’s economy.

The social and economic needs of urban residents and
businessesareextremelyvaried and complex comparedwith
those of simpler settlements.They require wide rangesof
awarenessandknowledgethat arehumanlybeyondthe com—
prehension of functionaries in distant institutions, who try to
overcome that handicap by devising programs that disregard
particulars on the assumption that one size can fit all, which
is untrue. Even when sovereignties and provinces or states
give specialgrants to this or that locality, the specialgrants al—
most alwaysrenectthe priorities of the disbursinginstitu—
tions, not those of the recipient settlements.

So dysfunctional have these ordinary arrangements be—
come that in North America associationsof mayorsof mu—
nicipalities, and associations of municipalities themselves,
havetaken to expressingtheir disappointmentsand dissatis—
factions loudly, sometimes at screaming levels. The Organiza—
tion for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD),
composed of thirty currently rich countries, published a re—
in 2002, Citiesfor Citizens: ImprovingMetropolitanGover-
port
nance,thepurport of which isthat somethingiswrong which
needsfixing.

The disconnection between public treasuriesand local do—
mestic needs drawing upon them does not exist within tax—
payers’pocketsor bank accounts.The sametaxpayerssupply
money for all layersof government. Rather, the disconnection
is purely administrative and governmental. It is a political arti—
factwith the strengthof bureaucratictradition.That being so,
the dumbed—down result should theoretically be simple to
if experience in Canada is a guide, it can’t be
mend; but,

106 / DARK AGE AHEAD

mended.If it wereonly true thatnecessityisthe motherof in—
vention, we would havehere a political
invention on the verge
of happening, but sinceopportunityis actually the mother of in—
vention, this neededpolitical invention hasn’tmaterialized.
The closestthings to such events happening in our times are
the peaceful separation of Singapore from Malaysia, and the
peaceful separationof Czechoslovakia into the two sovereign—
ties of the Czech Republic and Slovakia.But in most countries
such separationwould risk terrorism and warfare, ashas hap—
penedin SriLanka,Cyprus,andChechnyaandhasbeenthreat—
ened elsewhere in placestoo numerous to mention. Besides,
nothing standsstill; even successfuland peaceful actsof separa—
tion that confer subsidiarity and fiscal responsibility becauseof
sovereignties’ smallnessdo not answer the question of what
will happenwhen thosesovereigntiesgrow out of touch with
newly growing localities and their needs,perhapswith innuxes
of immigrant populations.

Dumbed—down use of taxes—and the dumbed—downuse
of powers the taxesmake possible—imposesdeterioration, and
it is surprisinghow rapidly this canhappenonceit getsunder
way. Toronto used pleasantly to surprise visitors and travel
writers by its combination of civilized urban grooming and
civil manners with exuberantly cosmopolitan diversity of
population, activities,and streetscenes.It wasnot only a re—
warding place to visit, no matter what the weather, but a fine
place to live. Peter Ustinov natteringly described Toronto as
“New York run by the Swiss.”

No longer does the description ring wittily true. Toronto’s
former neatness and cleanliness have so much degenerated
that a visitor (me) to Richmond, Virginia, and San Francisco
now enviously notices how clean, in comparison with To—

DUMBED—DOWN

TAXES

/

IO’7

ronto, those cities are.The Toronto workers who usedto sweep
up street litter after garbage and recycling trucks had passed
through,andpick upin parksafterbusyweekends,havevanished
for lack of moneyto paythem.Homeless,raggedpanhandlers
pop forth belligerently or pathetically nom semi—sheltering
doorsteps. They bed down atop subway grilles and under
park benches and tables. They also crowd to overnowing
church basementsand other dormitory shelterswhere, ac—
cording to public health workers, antibiotic—resistanttuber—
culosis is spreading. Torontonians returning from summers or
sabbaticalsaway cite litter and homelessnesswhen they speak
of culture shock on their return.

They alsomention noticing a disquieting surlinessor pub—
lic sullenness:impatience, impoliteness, rage. These are more
subtlesignsthat Toronto hasbecomeacity in crisis,indeedin
multiple crises.

The formerly excellent public transit system is starved for
operating funds. Any grantsit hasreceivedfor many yearsnom
the federal or provincial governments havebeen for capital ex—
penditureson avery few lines,which only increasedoperating
expenses,and which have been so ill—chosenas routes (more
about that later) that they arenot lucrative. The local transit au—
thority thus lacksmoney to maintain and repair equipment, or
to respondintelligentlyto increasesin city populationandem—
ployment. To try to make do, it trims service and raisesfares.
Subways, streetcars, and feeder buses have become intolerably
overcrowded in rush hours;
the
system is experiencing serious declines in ridership during a
period of rising employment(andthusof risingneedfor pub—
lic transit). It is caught in the vicious spiral of poorer service,
decliningpatronage,andrising fares.

for the nrst time in its history,

108 / DARK AGE AHEAD

As transit riders decrease,pollution indices from car emis—
sions increase. The summer of 2002 generated unprece—
dentednumbersof days—eighteen—withsmogsufficiently
evil for health ofncials to warn vulnerable citizens to close
their windows and stay indoors. Hospitals receive unprece—
dented numbers of children with asthma, which has become
the single largest reasonfor admission of children to hospitals.
Not surprisingly,the highest smoglevelsare in excessively
car—dependentsuburbs, most notably in Oshawa, eastof To—
ronto, the General Motors company town of Canada.

Between 1996 and 2002, Toronto suffered a net loss of
17,515 rental housing units, mostly to developers who can
make bigger profits by building and marketing condomini—
ums. Only the few richest householdscan afford the many
fewer apartments or houses for rent, particularly those built
before the Second World War, which theoretically should be
trickling down to the poor, but which are desirableand costly
after renovation and are located in the most lively and inter—
esting neighborhoods.Against the massivelossesof rental
units, only seventy—four(yes,74) subsidizedapartmentsaf—
fordable by low—wageearners,single—incomefamilies, dis—
abledpersons,and otherson welfarehavebeenaddedto the
city’s housing stock in more than a decade.Building this pit—
tancerequirednine yearsof strenuousand devotedeffort on
the part of a band of community volunteers; among many
barriers they surmounted was a development
tax of more
than $1,200 per apartment, eXtorted to anticipate public
schooling costsof tenants’ children.

In Chapter 2 I mentioned that assisted—housingpolicies,
designs,and managementhad becomeunpopularwith both
tenantsand taxpayersand,like public housingin the United

DUMBED—DOWN

TAXES

/

109

States, had been drastically curtailed in Canada. However,
owing to the good fortune of a clever, courageous,and popu—
lar mayor, David Crombie; a housing commissioner, Michael
Dennis, who was a genius at cutting red tape; creative archi—
tects; and strong citizen support, Toronto managed to win in—
dependencefrom the province for planning and designof
assistedhousing in 1972. It also extricated itself from the fed—
eralgovernment’sred tape.

The city used its new responsibilities to build on very
small, scatteredsites.Architecturally the buildings varied, de—
pending on existing surroundings; on streetswith grand old
Victorian houses, the inf1lled assistedhousing sported cone—
topped turrets and bay windows. Dreary vacant lots were
knit backinto lively city fabric. The new policieswere eco—
nomical becausesmall siteswere unattractiveto competing
developers with deep pockets; yet small sites added up as
they were built upon by cooperatives, public bodies, and
other nonprofit builders. No longer was new assistedhous—
ing set apart from the normal city, nor its residents stigma—
tized asproject dwellers.If
their incomesrose,they tended
to stayby choice, making it feasible to raise rents when ten—
ants’incomesrose,which releasedmoney to augmentfur—
ther inf1lling.

For twenty years, Toronto built assistedhousing in this
fashion, incorporating many constructive innovations in ad—
dition to the few I’ve mentioned. The program was popular
with both taxpayers and residents, yet it was felled by one—
size—fits—allbureaucracyWhen the federalandprovincialgov—
ernmentshaltedgrantsfor assistedhousing,Toronto’sresources
for it were cut off, too. Insteadof learning from innovations
and encouraging them to spread, the senior governments

110 / DARK AGE AHEAD

killed them. Death to innovation is death to economic and so—
cial development.

When I go to our neighborhood shopping street,I am
askedby a well—spoken,shabbily dressedman of late middle
ageto write that he and others in his fix need rooming houses,
but rooming housesare gone. “Pleasetell it, spreadthe word,”
he says.I promise I will; he thanks me, and I don’t have the
heart to tell him that spreadingthe word doesno good.

Here comes fiscal accountability: by agreement, the sover—

eign federal government and the provinces are supposed to
share costs for the health and hospital system.But a curious
thing happens. When the federal government grants addi—
tional funds to the province to be disbursed for that purpose,
our province,alongwith someothers,hasbeendeductingan
equivalent amount from their own contributions,
raisedfrom
the federal government nor citizens
their own taxes.Neither
havebeenableto learnwhat provincialkleptocraciesdo with
these windfalls. Similar sleight of hand occurs with federal
grantsto provincesfor licensedday carefor preschoolchil—
dren; in this case,however, the province choosesto spend the
money not for licensed day care but for grants to families in
which mothers do not work—because the neoconservatives
running the province object ideologically to working moth—
ers. (Before that government was elected, it promised to sup—
port expanded day care.So did the federal government.) Lack
of fiscal accountability leavescities, which need the day care,
and the federal government, which allocates some money for
it, both helplessto achievethe expansion.

Apart from attackson the health system,the debasements

that have causedthe angriest massprotests, and probably the
most anxiety to parents,havebeen economiesstripping the

DUMBED—DOWN

TAXES

/

III

once—excellentToronto public school system.In a city and
region that receiveshalf the foreign immigrants of the entire
country, speaking more than eighty mother tongues, teachers
of English asa second language have been all but eliminated,
and schoollibraries havebeen stripped of librarians.Music
and other arts programs have been deleted as extravagant
frills, a contempt alsovisited on all manner of Toronto artists
and groups such astheater and dance companies, for whom
small grants previously received from the city made the dif—
ference between a frugal existence and no existence.

The greatest stresson parents and children,

judging by
protests,hasbeen arousedby school closings—dozensof them,
with more continually threatened.Most of thesewere gen—
uine neighborhoodschoolsto which children could walk or
bicycle.They were alsoaccessibleto handicappedchildren,
for many of whom special programs and teachers—also
chipped away—had made normal schooling possible. Once,
schoolswere relied on ascommunity centers,but youth groups
and other volunteer community service groups are now
charged so heavily for classroom use for meetings, and for
gyms, cafeterias, and auditoriums
that
groups like the Girl Guides and Boy Scouts can’t afford the
fees.Community use of schools dropped 43 percent between
2000 and 2002. In 2003, 350 after—schoolcourses,ranging
from piano and art lessonsto computers and graphic design,
were cut: no more “lifelong learning” for retiredpeople,im—
migrants, and other citizens. New fees were added even for
groups using outdoor basketball courts and baseball fields.
Schools built when taxpayersand parents were still permitted
to take pride in them have been disproportionately doomed
becausetheir generouscorridors and handsomelobbies exceed

for other activities,

112 / DARK AGE AHEAD

mean—spiritedformulasfor allowablesquaremetersof build—
ing spaceper student. By such measures,a culture’s social cap—
ital is systematically squandered.

Toronto’s desperatecheeseparingis not driven by economic
necessityAs explained in the previous chapter, it happened to
coincide,
in 2002, with an unusual economic expansion in the
metropolitan area.Nor does it renect stinginesson the part of
taxpayers.Accordingto the Boardof Trade,composedof city
businesses,in 2001 the federalgovernment collected $20 billion
nom Toronto taxpayers in income, sales, and excise taxes, of
which an indeterminate but lesseramount was returned to the
localityin theform of governmentexpendituresfor goodsand
services,paymentsto consultantsandother contractorssupply—
ing goodsand servicesto the sovereigngovernment,interest
payments to pension funds and other holders of government
bonds, transfer payments to individuals qualifying under na—
tional programs, and special grants. Federal budget figures are
lumped into Canada—wideexpenditures, making it impossible
to learn how much goesto specific localities and for what pur—
poses.The chairman of
the federal parliamentary caucus for
Toronto andits region claimshe hasbeen unable to identify bil—
lions that supposedlyhavegone annually to the GreaterToronto
Area. Even a member of the prime minister’s own parliamen—
tary taskforce, assignedto study and report on municipal needs
and problems, saysthe task force was also left in the dark. So
much, once again,for fiscal accountability “How canyou mea—
sure the effectivenessof existing programs or propose new
ones,” he asked,“if you can’t get that kind of information?”

Researchby Glen Murray, the mayor of Winnipeg—the
poorest of Canada’s half—dozenlarge cities (Toronto is the
richest)—estimates that Winnipeg residents and businesses

DUMBED—DOWN

TAXES

/

113

pay annually about $7 billion in federal, provincial, and mu—
nicipal taxes.“But only six percent of that nnds its way into
municipal coffers.” He estimatesToronto’s contribution to
federal, provincial,
taxes in 2001 was $21 bil—
lion. Estimatesof the proportion of the total going to the city
treasuryrangedbetween4.5 percentand 6 percent,because
the city had to depend so largely on yields from its residential
property taxes.

and municipal

Canadian taxpayers recognize and accept that federal in—
come, sales, and excise taxes must cover the normal costs of a
sovereign government. They recognize, too, that a high pro—
portion of Toronto’s surplus tax yields is destined for poor re—
gions, of which Canadahasmany, that areunable to pay their
own way. This is understood asa price of equity or fraternity,
of national unity and peace, and as a rough justice rendered
indirectly from large corporations whose taxpaying head of—
ficesmay be in Toronto or its region, but which profitably
exploit
that, however,
doesn’t alter the fact that not enough resources return for
municipal
that Winnipeg
can’tscrapeup the modestsumsneededfor adequaterepairof
winter—damagedpavementsand curbs. The inadequacyof
resourcesfor social investment penalizes children who need
educations that were unnecessarywhen youngsters were des—
tined for farm and mining labor, logging and fishing, or ser—
vants’ jobs.

reinvestment. Murray points out

resources nationwide.

natural

All

Toronto’s current public poverty is artincial, deliberately

imposed by policies that in Canadaare called neoconser—
vatism. In America, a similar ideology is known asreinvented
governmentor the Washingtonconsensus.In Britain it takes
the name of Thatcherism. Internationally, much the sameset

114 / DARK AGE AHEAD

of beliefs and policies is recognizable as “economic reforms
demanded by the International Monetary Fund.”

itself,

its cost. Thus each school

At the core of this intellectualphenomenonnow shaping
much (but not all) of Western culture is a moralistic belief
thateachpublic serviceor amenityshoulddirectlyearnenough
is supposed to earn
to support
enough to support
through fees of some kind or
through profit—makingarrangementssuchassaleto a corpo—
ration of monopolistic rights to vend soft drinks and snacks.
Sucharrangementsarecalledpublic—privatepartnerships(PPP,
or P3) and are much encouraged by neoconservatives and
most boards of trade. Each artist is supposedto earn enough
in his or her own lifetime to prove the art’s ntnessto exist.
Hospitals, transit systems,and orchestras are scorned asfree—
loadersseekinghandoutsif they can’tdirectlypaytheir wayor,
better yet, make a profit either for tax collectors or for a cor—
porate partner. Greed becomes culturally admired as compe—
tence, and falseor unrealistic promises ascleverness.

To be sure, neoconservative ideologues are selective in
their social and economic choices for worthiness to survive
and nourish. They subsidizeprofessionalsportsstadiums,auto—
motive assemblyplants, roads, and other preferences,with tax
breaks and other benefits.

In Canada,neoconservativegovernmentsdisplaytheir suc—
cessin the form of tax breaks or tax rebates,primarily bene—
fiting rich taxpayersunder the assumption(or excuse)that
they will
invest the money in job creation. What the cuts do,
rather, at least for a time or two,
In 2000, an
electionyear,our provincial governmentsenttax—cutrebates
of $200 to most taxpayers.I received one. This is why school
librarians can’t be paid, or music teachersand teachersof

is buy elections.

DUMBED—DOWN

TAXES

/

115

Englishasa secondlanguage.It is why there areno low—rent
families receiving those
rooming houses for old men. Most
checkspay more than $200 in such added expenses—depend—
ing on circumstances—ashigher rents, higher transit costs,
and new recreation and tuition fees.The taX cuts’ chief bene—
fit, asfar asI cansee,is the emotionalsatisfactionthey bring
to ideologues.

Virtually all ideologues,of anyvariety,arefearfulandinse—

cure, which is why they are drawn to ideologies that promise
prefabricated answersfor all circumstances.Every society con—
tains such people. But they can exert considerable power only
when they control public purse strings which are not subject
to the principles of subsidiarity and fiscal accountability. In
the caseof Canada,that naw is actually written into the
country’s constitution, but in various forms and degreesit oc—
cursjust about everywhere.

When Canada’sconstitution was formulated and adopted
in 1867, as the British North America Act, a document
of
the English Parliament, most of the country’s scanty popula—
tion lived in rural hamletsbasedon trapping,nshing,logging,
or meageragricultureandstockraising.There wereno cities
other than Montreal and Quebec City, the French capital,
both of which had fallen to the English by their defeat of the
Frenchin war, and embryonic Toronto. The few substantial
settlements were narrowly basedcompany towns such asfur—
trading posts,or frontier military garrisonsor tiny market
towns that depended directly on the rural economies.

The constitution did not recognize these socially and eco—
nomically feeblesettlementsasinstitutions of government.It
bracketed them,
instead, with asylums and taverns, as depen—
the provinces, and they were allowed to levy
dent wards of

116 / DARK AGE AHEAD

only propertytaxes.This wasprobablynot abadideaat atime
when they were capable of no more than maintaining un—
pavedstreets,nghting nres(usuallyby self—organizedvolun—
teers), providing rudimentary sewersand wells, and operating
jails for holding drunks and other disorderlycharacterswho
got out of hand.

Now half the Canadian population lives in the country’s
nvelargestcities;another30 percentlive in settlementswith
populations of ten thousand or more, mostly in the suburbs
or exurbsof large cities. The Canadianrural economy,in—
logging, and nshing as well as agriculture,
cluding mining,
accounts for only about 3 percent of grossdomestic product.
The rest of
the economy depends on tourism, popular arts
and nne arts, technological researchand enterprises,construc—
tion, wholesaleand retail services,publishing and printing,
manufacturing,
and health, education, and other government—
supported servicesand amenities.

Canadian municipalities are no longer country—bumpkin
villages.The expertiseand creativeabilitiesthey containput
provincial and federal legislatures and agencies to shame, as
Toronto demonstratedwith its infill assistedhousing. City pop—
ulationspossessdiversinedabilitiesfor identifying, diagnosing,
and solving local shortcomings and needs.Even municipalities
that are still small are sufnciently sophisticatedto know where
to nnd knowledgeable help. Yet the anachronistic provincial—
municipalwardshiparrangementsstillhold.When theconstitu—
tion was patriated in 1982—declared a Canadian instead of a
British document—guaranteesof basiccivil rightswereadded,
but nothing was done to changethe relationship of municipal—
ities with provinces.

Healthy municipalities do not march in lockstep.At a

DUMBED—DOWN

TAXES

/

II’7

giventime, eachhasits own needsandmay alsohaveits own
particular opportunities for innovative solutions. These op—
portunities canbe very valuable.Central planning, whether
by leftists or conservatives, draws too little on local knowl—
edge and creativity, stinesinnovations, and is inefficient and
costly becauseit is circuitous. It bypassesintimate and varied
knowledge directly fed back into the system.

Between the mid—19505and the early 19905, Toronto did
well on the whole, with severalsignincant episodesof city im—
port replacingduring thoseforty years,which enhancedboth
its property tax base and its reservoirs of diverse exportable
goods and services.

However, beneath the tranquil and prosperous surface,
much wasgoing wrong. The adaptationby the city to new
and increased demands upon it was to load onto its property
tax costs that were unforeseeable in 1867. These included,
for
inspections of restaurant kitchens, canner—
instance, costs of
ies, bottlers, and other
food processors; health inspection of
homes for the elderly; welfare costs;policing againsttelephone
and door—to—doorfraudsters; lifeguards for beaches and in—
structors for school swimming pools; archivists; recreational
andeducationalprogramsin parks;salariesfor horticulturists
to combat the spreadof diseasesin street and park trees, and
for biologists to track outbreaks of rabies and fevers in urban
wildlife; experiments with recycling and other waste man—
agement schemes;discouragement of hate crimes and other
expressions of
of ethnic celebra—
tions; and so on, all part of

intolerance; encouragement

the fabric of modern urban life.

Many costsof urbanlife andurbaninfrastructuresaremost
equitably levied according to ability to pay; others are most
the economy. These taxes
equitably related to expansion of

118 / DARK AGE AHEAD

this system.Finally, increasesin property taX as—

are reserved for the so—calledsenior governments. So munic—
ipalities haveloaded everything onto the property tax, decade
after decade.As with the camel’s load that was increased a
straw at a time, along came the strawsthat threatened to break
the back of
sessmentson small businesses—laundries, restaurants, retail
stores—were becoming so heavy asadded operating coststhat
they threatened to bankrupt many establishments and put
them out of business,along with their suppliers and employ—
ees.Proposedseparationof public nnancialresponsibilities,
some for residential property taxpayersand some for business
taxpayers, sounded like a plausible way out of
the impasse.
But it wasn’t. The division itself was deceptive and inequitable
(so much for nscalaccountability) and gavemore power than
ever to the province to micromanage the city, with the de—
structive kinds of results I have touched on.

The province had alsointroduced an additional layer of
government, called Metro, which ostensibly was to coordi—
nate governance of
the city proper with its inner suburbs.
Metro wasrigged sothat the city’sheart could andwould be
outvoted on decisionswhen the car—dependentand community—
dencient suburban subcultures connicted with the city sub—
culture, which happened constantly Metro government was
one tedious wrangle after another. The ill—assortedpartsfought
about their sharesof residential property taX assessments,and
began undermining the transit systemby insisting that it bear
the costsof suburban routes that couldn’t pay for themselves;
the “solution” wasto force transitservicesin the city, which
more thanpaidtheir costs,to subsidizeinefncientroutesuntil
city transitwasbled dry.

Connicting nnancial and social elementsin the Metro

DUMBED—DOWN

TAXES

/

119

arrangement became truly catastrophicin 1998 when the dys—
functional parts were amalgamatedunder a single new City of
Torontogovernment,in denanceof provinciallyunauthorized
local referendums opposing it. The province promised that
amalgamationwould savemoney. It didn’t. It was expensivefor
manyreasons,someunavoidable,someirresponsible,someap—
parently corrupt, all of
Toronto’sdeteriorationbecamevisibleandenraging,with sur—
prising rapidity. Whether tourism began declining becausethe
city had become less attractive or for other reasonswas un—
known becauseToronto had been forestalled (seep. 104) nom
getting funds to experiment with providing information for
touristsandgatheringinformation nom them.

them deplorable. From this time on,

Some worried and angry Canadian citizens argue that
large cities and their metropolitan areasshould break away
from existing provinces and form new provinces of their own
(underthe existingfederalgovernment),therebybridging the
gulf that separatespublic resourcesfrom subsidiarity and fis—
cal accountability. They may be right. But it seemslike reach—
ing for a Sledgehammerto drive a tack.

right, a share of

A gentler remedy could be for the federal government to
its income—tax yields to munici—
allot, as of
the federal goods
palities or, again as of right, a portion of
and services tax, which is a value—added tax under another
name. Municipalities would thus share in the investments
made possible by the rewards of economic expansion. Per—
haps best would be a mixture of
the two allotments. Since
they would go to municipalities as of right, without strings,
the so—calledsenior governmentscould ceasetrying to mi—
cromanageand to standardizemunicipal policies and gover—
nance.Standardizationis the parentof stagnation.

120 / DARK AGE AHEAD

When I had an opportunity to discussthis revenue—sharing
possibility with Mr. Paul Martin, who at the time was federal
nnance minister and who has become Canada’snew prime
minister, he first dismissed the suggestion out of hand with
the excusethat the constitution doesn’t allow it. I pointed out
that nothing in the constitution forbids sharing the yields
from forms of taxation that did not even exist until genera—
tions after the adoption of the British North America Act,
and that
the federal government already allots income—tax
shares, or points, as they are called,

to the provinces.

When I saw a shadow passover his expressiveand attentive
face,I assumedhe wasglumly contemplatingtax increases.I
remarkedthat sharingincome tax with municipalitieswould
not entail higher taxesbecauseit would be only fair to sub—
tract equivalentfundsfrom allotmentsto provincesto carefor
their erstwhile dependents. Possibly it was a mistake to men—
tion this, althoughhe is a smartman andwould surelysoon
have looked at this side of
the equation for himself. He
quickly shot out,
“Impossible! Everybody wants money!”
bringing our taxationdiscussionto a halt. Our vantagepoints,
and therefore our views, were different. A reform that meant
to me correction of a grave social and economic disconnec—
tion that is unraveling the country’s complex modern func—
tional networks meant
I saw ashis ears and face closed
up, a nasty power struggle with the premiers of ten provinces
who are determined to keep their power instead of sharing it
with their more knowledgeable,

anachronistic wards.

to him,

Perhaps to cheer or placate me, he told me that he in—
tendedto announceaprogramof federalgrantsenablingmu—
nicipalities to install light—rail public transit. Now it was my
turn to demur. I told him that unfortunate experiencesal—

DUMBED—DOWN

TAXES

/

121

readyshowedthat fixed transitrouteswere expensivefailures
when they were not preceded by evidence of sufncient de—
mand. Underused routes not only area drain on transit systems
but are ill—suitedascontributors to the needsand convenience
of users.In the past, designers of
transit systemshad usually
chosen to locate rail routes by observing which bus routes
were most heavily used, a pragmatic method that worked well
in Toronto and elsewhere.After it was apparently lost to tran—
sit engineers’ memories in the 1960s, Toronto and a number
of other cities, among them Atlanta, Buffalo, Detroit,
and
Chicago, tried rail routes justified by other goals and these
have proved unable to pull
their weights, literally or figura—
tively. They don’t have enough passengers.I assertedthat a
prudent program to promote transit must be nexible enough
to encourage experiments with routes, should that be what a
city wanted to do, and possibly experiment with bus sizes,
beforesettlingon fixed rail routes.Why not specifygrantsfor
transit? I wondered aloud. Why specify from on high what
form the transit must take?

I wastoo tactful to mention the hazardsof being out of
touch with specific needs, nor my suspicion that he found a
light—railgrantprogramattractivebecauseit would beafederal
goody to extend to Bombardier, a Canadian multinational cor—
poration that manufacturesstreetcars,with headquartersin
Montreal, and that this benefit would be well receivedby Que—
bec voters, ever a pressingconcern of the federal government,
but thesethoughts went quickly through my head.

As he sawmy earsand face closeup, he pointed out that the
mayorsof every large city had askedfor light—railtransit grants.
I told him that I had attended the meetings where they arrived
atthisunanimity;theyreasonedthat askingfor light—railgrants

122 / DARK AGE AHEAD

was politically more realistic than asking for other kinds of
public transit equipment or more general transit help, such as
grantsfor operatingcosts,the most desperateneedin some
municipalities.

Mr. Martin perfunctorily conceded that nexibility might
be worth taking into consideration.Again I saw that our
points of view were different. What he could contemplate as
attractivebonanzasfor clamoring citiesandperhapsfor com—
plaining corporations producing rails and streetcars,I feared
asforegone fiascoes.

It being my turn to try to restore harmony, I remarked that
we both had, in common, concern for the common good. He
could havereplied, but was too polite to do so,that everybody
claimsa desireto promote the common good.The common
good is an abstraction,whose constructionand collapseplay
out in many concrete decisions and acts.

Declining voter

turnouts and increasing disdain among
polled members of the public for politicians (and their prom—
ises)are evidence that people in a number of Western coun—
tries have concluded that voting is a waste of effort. That
increasingnumbersof votersactthiswayin advanceddemoc—
racies,where the senseof civic responsibilityshouldbe strongest,
indicates popular disconnection from Lincoln’s government
“of
the people, by the people, for the people.” Pigeonhol—
ing that
ideal as irrelevant or unattainable means losing it.
That
is how weakening of cultural webs leads to further
weakening.

While Canada has the unique constitutional naws I have
mentioned, naws with surprisingly similar
results plague
in spring of 2003,
American municipalities. As this is written,
the mayorof New York, Michael Bloomberg, is locked into

DUMBED—DOWN

TAXES

/

123

a budget combat with the governor of New York State,
George Pataki. The mayor saysthat to overcome a threatened
city budgetdencitof nearly$4 billion, he needsto imposea
taX on commuters’ pay earned in the city. The governor says
he won’t allow it. The mayorsayshis alternativeis to reduce
numbers of police recruits; lay off sanitation workers; slash
overtime pay of nremen; close swimming pools; drastically
cut staff for child services,health and mental hygiene, ser—
vices for the homeless, and after—school educational and recre—
ationalprograms;and reduceor perhapseliminateweekend
take—homemeals for poor elderly people. Of course he has
enumeratedservicecutshejudgeswould be most politically
unpopular.The governorpointsto his own forthcoming state
budget dencit of $10 billion, but in any case,like the US.
president, he is an ideological taX cutter, regardlessof dencits,
layoffs, and loss of services. It all sounds very familiar to a
Canadian.

Colonial possessionsof European and Asian empires used to
be the mostdeprivedof the benentsof subsidiarityandnscal
responsibility.SinceWorld War 11,poor countriesreceiving
foreign aid are in that unenviableposition. Dumbed—down
resourcesmove through the stratospherefrom rich sovereign
governments—or the World Bank and the International Mon—
etary Fund, which are much the same as rich sovereign
states—to poor sovereign governments for disbursement.
Running like a sadrefrain through half a century and billions
of dollars of waste and disappointment, and often outright
harm, is the lament “The aid didn’t reach those for whom it
was intended.”

The unintended consequences have been many. Peasants

124 / DARK AGE AHEAD

dumbed—down, out—of—touch foreign

havebeen pauperized asthey were evicted nom ancestrallands
for dams accompanied by promises of prosperity through
electricity and attraction of foreign corporationswith jobs.
Where prosperity failed to materialize,unpayablenational
debts were forgiven on condition of reforms which them—
selvesincreasedpoverty andupheaval.A book could be writ—
ten about dysfunctional,
aid. Indeed, many books have been, some by appalled out—
siders, some by rueful
insiders and participants. Good inten—
tions arenot lacking; subsidiarity and fiscal accountability are.
Aid failures promote instability and terrorism. Some of the
ugly scenesto which we havebecomeaccustomed,suchas
crowds of screaming young men in city streets;boys throw—
ing stones at armed soldiers and police; lethally armed child
soldiersorganizedinto maraudingbandsof robbersandmur—
derers; carnage of innocent people by angry, vengeful suicide
bombers—theseareharvestsof many complex failureswith
many causes.Among those causesare our culture’s profound
failure to make practical realities of
the principles of sub—
sidiarity and financial accountability. Throwing money at
programs omitting those principles is no solution. Legal
power not basedon thoseprinciples is no solution.Blaming
victims is not enlightening; after all, in even the most pros—
perous and fortunate countries,
knows how to fix the lacks of subsidiarity and fiscal account—
ability, and if we in North America are unable to fiX this
problem for ourselves, of course we can’t fix it

for others.

those of

the OECD, nobody

CHAPTER

SIX

Self—PolicingSubverted

learned professions have traditionally been re—
responsibly
themselves through oversight
law societies, state boards of medicine,

Members of
garded by themselves and others as capable of
regulating, and even policing,
by bar associations,
colleges of physicians and surgeons, medical associations,in—
stitutes of architects, engineering societies,institutes of certi—
ned or chartered accountants, and the like. These people not
only enjoy status aseducated experts; they are seenasestab—
lishment figures with stakesin maintaining stability, honesty,
and good order for the common welfare. They are trusted to
disciplineor strip professionalstatusfrom suchfrauds,brutes,
and psychopaths asmake their ways into high—mindedprofes—
sional ranks.

Historically, professionalinsistenceon self—regulation,and
socialtrust in professionals’accountability,hark back to an—
cient priesthoods, probably the first learned societies.Priestly

126 / DARK AGE AHEAD

history echoesinto modern times.Governmentsandpriest—
hoods haveoften come into connict over clerical demandsfor
exemption from civil regulation, especiallywhen clergies’ de—
mands have overnowed into demands to prescribe or dictate
for otherstoo. This sort of connictwasat issuein the separa—
tion of the Anglican Church from the Roman Catholic Church
under Henry VIII
in England: it remains a very live issuein
Israelandin someIslamiccountriesto this day.

Self—regulation and self—policing are different, although
they overlapand blur. “Self—regulation”refersmainly to the
internal affairs of professional groups. For example, architects’
professional institutes typically mandate the fees their mem—
bers charge clients, with these customarily set at standardper—
centagesof the total cost of projects, on a sliding scale.This
isroughly realistic;the largeraproject, the more work is usu—
ally entailed, from initial programming and design, through
working drawings,specifications,tendering, and construc—
tion supervision. However, architects of outstanding origi—
nality and conscientiousness tend to lavish effort on small
projects in amounts that render standard percentagesunreal—
istic. As usual

in life, one size does not

fit all.

In many other commercial activities, mutually agreed—upon

fee shaving is eschewed as legitimate competition,

fees among competitors for clients would be deemed illegal
collusion in restraint of trade. The architects’ rationale is that
if
then
artistry, skill, and competence can be concentrated upon as
competitive factors instead. In a neld like architecture—part
art, and alsovery much a matter of public safetyandpublic
amenity—competitive quality surely cannot be written off as
a badthing.

Another form of architects’self—regulationis to ban criti—

SELF—POLICING

SUBVERTED

/

127

cism of another’s work, especially criticism that can be heard
or read by outsiders. This is why one readsfew critical reviews
by architectsof new buildings,in comparisonwith reviewsby
writers, say,of books, dramas, and film, or by musicians of mu—
sical compositions and performances. Architects’ mutual pro—
tectionfrom adversenoticeextends,when possible,to criticism
by outsiders aswell. When I was hired asan editor and writer
by anarchitecturaljournal, the editor in chief gaveme quickly
I must shun critical comment. Otherwise,
to understand that
he explained,not only would our magazinestir up an un—
pleasant
those whose
work was most interesting, would refuse us information and
permissionto publishtheir designs—adeathsentencefor the
magazine.

ruckus, but all architects,

including

We made quality distinctions, of course. If

there were
good ideasand useful lessonsin an ungainly or mean piece of
work, we emphasizedthe good points and ignored their con—
teXt; but this was rare. Almost alwayswe published only pro—
posals, buildings, or projects we could unreservedly admire,
or that the editor in chief unreservedlyadmired, ignoring
others.Sofor anarchitectto gethiswork publishedin ajour—
nal where it could be seenby clients was a compliment,
rather like a low—keyaward. We were attuned to reputations
within the profession, and we bowed obsequiously to fashion
(aword we never mentioned; architecture hasstyles,not fash—
ions),asdid architectsthemselves.Leafingthrough designand
architectural journals a half century later, I seethat they still
abide by the familiar restrictions.

Only after an architect was deadand his onice had dissolved,
or so much time had elapsedthat objectivity was deemed fea—
sible,could critical lessonsbe learnednom our magazineor

128 / DARK AGE AHEAD

other architecturaljournals,which wereallin the samebind as
ours. Like architects themselves, we were unable to pursue ed—
ucationalwork we might haveundertakenfor enlightenment
of

the public, clients, students, and other architects.
Somewhat counterbalancing

this omission, however,

is ed—
ucationalwork undertakenby manylocal institutesof archi—
tects. They researchproblems that members havein common,
hold discussions,listen to invited speakers—some of
them
critical—and maintain mutual education committees on vari—
ous building and construction types, such asschools,hospitals,
civic buildings, and street designs.This would hardly be pos—
sible if members felt seriously threatened by one another.

Professionalself—regulationextends to many more subjects
thanthetwo I’ve mentioned,dependingon theprofession.All
variations have the self—interest of members at their core, usu—
ally sincerely construed as advancement of
the profession it—
self A frequentlyadoptedregulationdictateswhethermembers
may advertise commercially, and if so, subject to what rules.
Recruits arefrequently required to passexaminationscomposed
and supervisedby the professionalbody. These areusuallymore
difncult and comprehensivethan examinationsrecruits have al—
ready passedat the conclusion of university studies,and I have
never heard of corrupt decisions on grades.These examina—
tions antedate the current debasement of university creden—
tials, having been instituted in the nineteenth or very early
twentieth centuries, at a time when a young man could get a
legal education by reading law under the personal supervision
of ajudge or experiencedlawyer,an architecturaleducation
by apprenticeship in an establishedstudio, or even a medical
education (usually shockingly inadequate) by observing and
assistinga physician or surgeon. A side effect of professional

SELF—POLICING

SUBVERTED

/

129

examinationsis that they control the number of recruitsad—
mitted into the profession. To have too many, relative to cur—
rent work available,threatensthe prosperity of all; to havetoo
few reduces the supply of
low—paidjuniors articled or in—
terned for specincperiods asapprentices.

seen as menacing, and which,

On the whole, professionalself—regulationseemswell toler—
ated in Western European and North American culture be—
is connned largely to internal professional concerns
cause it
that are not commonly
in any
case,the public knows little about. Furthermore,
it is hard to
imagine what other institutions of society could serveasregu—
lators of internal professionalaffairs.The likely alternativesare
probably burdensome and irrelevant bureaucracies,or elselack
of regulation, and alsoperhapsdemoralization of professionals—
not a good thing to risk.

that borders on the criminal.

Self—policingis touchier and more problematic than self—
regulation becauseit must combat fraud or other outright
crimes, and also misbehavior
It
overlaps with self—regulationmost obviously when malfea—
sanceis covered up in the interest of professionalsolidarity and
the professions public reputation. There is no quicker way for
a profession to lose public respect than to cover up, institu—
tionally, for members who have done arrant wrong, a lesson
that priesthoods are learning once again, and this could mean
that
the Roman Catholic priesthood’s self—regulatingrules
about celibacy and the gender of members need revision.

Mutual protection can be more subtly discerned when pro—
fessionsarenotablyreluctantor tardyin coming to gripswith
self—policingresponsibilities to which they neverthelesscling
tenaciously.Although this is lessraw than coveringup, tardi—
nesstoo arousespublic alarm and condemnation. Notorious

130 / DARK AGE AHEAD

examplesarebrutality toward aboriginal children or orphans
by Protestant missionaries or Catholic nuns, and casesof med—
icalmalpractice,quiterightly seenasindefensiblewhen diseases
and evendeathscontinue while a medical associationdilly—
dallies,sometimesfor yearsaftercrediblecomplaintsanddamn—
ing evidencehavebeenbroughtto its attention.In thesecases,
the protection of members from harassmentor false accusa—
tions, andthe protection of victims from harm, havebecome
so unbalanced that it would be better for a profession to give
up on self—policingandleavecrime andpunishmentto police
and courts, rather than to bishops and professionaldisciplinary
committees.

the malpractice,

In cover—upsor unreasonabletardiness,three different trans—
gressionsareoften involved. First, the actual crime: the embez—
zlement,
the child abuse, the bribe taking or
giving. Second, the cover—up,involving individuals of con—
siderablepower or innuencewho were not involvedperson—
ally in the initial wrongdoing, but whose senseof loyalty is
stronger than their attachment
to honesty and openness.
Since exaggeratedloyalty may be the very quality that gives
such people power and innuence in their institutions,
is
hardto know what canbe done about loyalty asself—serving
weakness.Third,
falseassurancesthat all is well.

the near crime of hoodwinking police with

it

Ah,

the police. Police officers form organizations too,
which arethe most self—protectiveof all. Even when police
don’t organize into police benevolent associations,they are
exaggeratedly protective of one another. Police can seldom
be depended on to police themselves. Their most common
forms of crime are bribe taking, brutality, and bearing false
witness.When police crimesareunmasked,it is usuallydone

SELF—POLICING

SUBVERTED

/

I31

by investigative journalists, sometimes helped by brave in—
formants from the inside and increasingly helped by scientists
such asforensic biologists and demographers.The standardre—
form attempted is a new layer of oversight: a civilian review
board to receive and deal with accusationsby the public.
Shortpublic memory—everyscandalis only anine—daywon—
der—and sincere but sentimentalized public appreciation of
the riskspolice run tend to underminecivilian reviewboards
aslong—termremedies.

Most sovereignties have in reserve high—level,exceptional
investigative procedures and enforcement powers—for
in—
stance,congressional investigations in the United States,and
crown inquiries in Canadaand other Westernmonarchies.
But theseoversightsleavemuch crime unattendedto, espe—
cially commercial crime.

Commercial enterprises, aswe all know, form associations
to presstheir self—interestson governments and to presentclean
faces in public: manufacturers’, home builders’, small—business,
and tobacco growers’ associations; chambers of commerce,
boards of
trade, businessimprovement districts, and so on.
However, these differ from self—regulatingprofessionalorgani—
zations,perhapsbecausebusinessassociationsarenot culturally
descendedfrom priesthoods. At any rate, they lack the expec—
tations of themselvesthat learned professionsassume,nor does
the public place trust in businessassociationsasit hastradition—
ally done in the learnedprofessions.Self—policingand self—
regulation havenever been typical businessresponsibilities.

Advanced cultures areusually sophisticatedenough, or have
been sophisticatedenough at somepoint in their pasts,to real—
ize that foxes shouldn’t be relied on to guard henhouses.Civil
legislation and courts take responsibility for adjudicating such

132 / DARK AGE AHEAD

commercial matters ascontracts, rights to intellectual proper—
ties, and governance of limited liability corporations (and, in—
deed, permission to form corporations in the first place).Uses
of force or fraud by commercialenterprisesare,without eX—
ception, defined as crimes. Without safeguardsagainstthem,
tradingwould degenerateinto raidingandextortion.

Some forms of business fraud are comparatively easy to
police: effective combat against short weight and counterfeit
coins, for instance, is very ancient, extending back into pre—
historic times. New frauds are forever emerging, followed by
ways to detect them.

The most gigantic types of businessfraud cannot be phys—
ically tested by inspectors, as adulterated butter can; or con—
fiscated,
brakeswith life—threateningnaws,or hazardoustoys.

like tainted meat; or recalled by manufacturers,

like

Columns of

fraudulent ngures, attesting to the robust fi—
nancial condition of a company that may actually be on the
verge of bankruptcy, are contrived either by falsifying ex—
pensesor by exaggerating income. To prevent false financial
reporting, governments havelong required corporations, part—
nerships,andmany other enterprises,including thoseclaim—
ing to be nonprofit or charitable,
to employ independent
accountants to audit their nnancial statements and attest to
the statements’ truth and accuracy.

Members of one of the learned professions, certified pub—
lic accountants (in Canada called chartered accountants), have
been trusted to oversee and guarantee honest financial re—
porting by business,which is why businessat largeis trusted.
That is the principal function of accountantsin civilized so—
cieties. Businessesthemselves benefit
from honest account—
ing; it combatsembezzlementand alertsthem to their own

SELF—POLICING SUBVERTED /

I33

wastes, inefficiencies, and competitive weaknesses and strengths.
When a profession with responsibilities like that goesrotten,
it is a cultural andeconomicnightmare.

The nnancialdebaclein 2001 at Enron, a huge andcom—
plex energy—tradingnrm with headquartersin Houston,
Texas, was a severe shock to the US. economy. False ac—
counting innated Enron’s apparent pronts and concealed its
all—too—real
losses.As the presshasfully reported, this main—
tained unjustinably high prices per shareof Enron stock long
enough for the corporation’s top executives to reap fortunes
in the millions of dollars from salesof stock to which they
had been granted options aspart of their generous compen—
sation.When the corporationwent into bankruptcysoonaf—
terward, the value of the stock plunged.

Many of Enron’sordinary workers,who had beenmisled
the public, abruptly lost their retire—
along with the rest of
ment savings.So did saversandinvestorsin many other pen—
sion funds, and thousands of small
funds
that held Enron stock. Enron auditors attempted to cover up
evidenceof accounting fraud by destroyingincriminating
documents.The executiveswho pronted so handsomelyin
suchatimely mannerdeniedknowledgeof the company’sn—
nances,brieny managing to shield themselvesfrom liability.

investors in mutual

This was followed early in 2002 by an epidemic of bank—
ruptcies in huge corporations. The deceptive accounting in
each casewas not necessarilyarranged by auditors themselves,
but by consultants whose servicesthe auditors supplied. The
tricks used were so arcane and elaborate that
they all but
passedunderstanding. The dennition of madness is loss of
connectionwith reality.By that dennition,this wasaccount—
ing gone mad; in olden times it would havebeen saidthat

134 / DARK AGE AHEAD

transgressingmembersof theprofessionhadsoldtheir soulsto
the devil.

However the rot set in, it did not happen overnight. It

assuring lenders of

beganat leastasfar backasthe mid—19805,asa consequence
of that decade’sfrenzies of mergers and takeovers,which cre—
ated unprecedentedly gigantic and unmanageable business
combines. Some shaky corporations that were overloaded
with debtsincurred for acquisitions,and were desperatefor
further nnancing, took to paying auditors for “solvency let—
ters” untruthfully
the corporations’
soundnessasborrowers. News of the letters, and their price
of half a million dollarseach,becamepublic in 1987owing
to a lawsuit concerning a bankrupt company that had used
such a letter. Accountants,speakinganonymously,told The
Wall StreetJournalthat mergershad so much reduced the
numbers of corporate clients that auditors had to rustle up
additionalsourcesof income for themselves,suchasthe pro—
duction of solvency letters. In addition,
they said, corporate
clients threatenedto nre auditorsif demandedletterswere
not forthcoming.

Auditors themselvesembarkedupon frenziedmerging and
consolidating.Perhapsthis was defensive,to rival bullying
clients’ sizesand muscle. The result was nve enormous multi—
national accounting nrms, eachemploying tensof thousandsof
certined public accountants and related consultants. One of
theseaccountingogres,Arthur Andersen,wasEnron’sdisgraced
auditor. Becauseof
its ruined reputation, the Andersen firm
broke up andwent out of business.But its fragmentssurvive
and have found work in many European countries, aswell as
North America.All nve of the giantshavenow beenmen—
tioned in the pressas alleged collaborators with corporations
whose columns of ngurescouldn’t support their housesof cards.

SELF—POLICING SUBVERTED / 135

In the meantime, the culture had castup a new tactic, plau—
sible denial, for useby deceivers.This is a preemptive prepara—
tion for future crimes and cover—ups.Underlings doing the
actual deceiving or other wrongs are careful not to inform su—
periors (in writing or in front of witnesses or eavesdroppers)
of what they aredoing, in order to shieldsuperiorsfrom ac—
countability. This tactic seemsto have been invented in the
US. Central IntelligenceAgency (CIA) but perhapsit origi—
nated in foreign secretpolice or spy organizations. It first came
into prominent—indeed,prestigious—usein North America
when it was adopted by two presidents:Richard Nixon, who
invoked plausible denial, unsuccessfully, to defend himself nom
culpability in the Watergate scandal, and Ronald Reagan,
who used it successfullyto shield himself in the Iran—Contra
scandals. The current president, George W Bush, has used it
to defend himself againstallegationsof unreported stock trad—
ing, an illegality the president has acknowledged but self—
excused on grounds of
gained$16million from the transaction,shortlybeforehe be—
came president. Speaking of plausible denial, a former chair—
man of the Securities and Exchange Commission hascalled it
“a game of nods and winks.”

the law. He reportedly

ignorance of

Schools of businessarenot blameless.These institutions are
trusted to educate certified public accountants and the busi—
nessmenand businesswomenwho can be expected to employ
them.In the summerof 2002,threeof America’smostpresti—
gious universities held a special three—dayseminar, at the
University of Chicago, for some eighty executivesdrawn
from the country’s largestmultinational corporations.The
purpose was to offer them guidance concerning accounting
malpractice.One might suppose,offhand, that the advice
would be “Don’t
do it; don’t allow it.” Not at all. A business

136 / DARK AGE AHEAD

instead,

journalist nom The New York Times,who was also in atten—
the university mentors warned
dance, reported that,
their high—levelstudents againstcandor. “They were told that
if they were forced to give a legal deposition in the aftermath
of a scandal,they should not volunteer any information”:
Don’t ask, don’t tell.

Behind the successof plausible denial is an already long—
the
standing North American disconnection from reality:
substitution of
image for substance.The idea is that a pre—
sentableimagemakessubstanceimmaterial.All that glittersis
gold. This probably began with the glorincation of literary
andsocialcelebritiesduring the latter nineteenthcentury,al—
though it wasremarkedevenearlierasanAmericantendency.
Falseimagemaking hasbecomeavery big businessthrough—
out North America and is a stapleof the US. government.
Legions of hired liars labor to disconnect reality from all
mannerof images—imagesof personalities,of legislation,of
corporations, of places, and of activities. Spin doctors, virtu—
ososof deceptiveimagemakinganddamagecontrol,havebe—
come authoritative spokespersonsin political campaigns and
troubled institutions, able not only to disconnect reality but
to constructnew reality.If that soundsconfusingabout the
reality of reality, it is; that is the purpose of spin—doctoring.
Dishonesty and greed, which I have been discussing, are
easily condemned; accountants themselves know these are
exploitative and wrong asmeansfor carrying on trade and
government. But there are deeper and more puzzling issuesin
accounting nowadays; accountants grappling with them do
not know what arethe right or wrong waysto dealwith them,
andneither doesanyoneelse.Plenty of legitimatepuzzlesde—
mand attentionfrom smartaccountants.

SELF—POLICING SUBVERTED / 137

One of the elementaryrealitiesin accountingis the dis—
tinction between capital assetsand operating expenses.Capi—
tal assetsare bankable:money can be borrowed to buy or
build them; if
the owner defaults on interest or repayments,
the lender can foreclose on the assetsand resell them, perhaps
to another borrower. This derives from the traditional con—
cepts of capital, basedon such assetsasland, buildings, ships
and their cargoes, and, since the industrial
pro—
duction equipment. But a body of knowledge or a piece of
information can be capital; even something asgossamerasan
idea can sometimes be intellectual capital.

revolution,

The traditional concept of capital hasalreadybroken down
when an educational credential is conceived of as collateral,
like a farm, crop, or machine that can be borrowed againstto
obtain it; but
in case of default a credential cannot be fore—
closed and resold like a farm, crop, or machine.

Supposea city plans to upgrade a waste recycling program
to increasewealth and reduce costsof transporting and storing
wastes.This entails educating producers of wastesand furnish—
ing them with low—pricedcompostersand other receptacles.
Are those expensescapital costs, against which the city can
borrow? Or are they operating expenses,which can’t exist
until relevant capital assetsexist?This is not a hypothetical ac—
counting issue.The question has arisen in the 2003 Toronto
budget and haspitted city accountants againstone another.

The phrases“human capital,” “social capital,” and “cultural
capital” are glibly spoken. These represent concepts about real
and powerful assets,more indispensable for wealth creation
and well—beingin modern societies than traditional bankable
capital—but difficult or impossible to handle in traditional ac—
counting terms. “Development costs” doesn’treally coverthem.

138 / DARK AGE AHEAD

They canproducewealth during their developmentanduse.
They consist of knowledge,
skills, and social and legal work—
ing assumptions—allof which are culturally transmitted—
possessedby a population.

How does one budget the inventory of an enterprise that,
by contract, retains ownership of part of
its sold products,
such asdurable material remaining in a camera, noor cover—
ing, or an appliance,so the maker can reclaim,recondition,
and resell the fraction with long—lastingvalue after the per—
ishablepart of the product is consumed?Again, this is not a
hypothetical
this manu—
facturing/recyclingtacticis nnanciallysuccessful—whichde—
pendsin part upon good guidancefrom accountants—the
practice may spread.

issue; it has already emerged, and if

Arrested accounting is unhelpful

for unprecedented finan—
cial concepts.The need for innovation in accounting practices
is hopeful evidence of promising economic developments.
Evidence that accountants can meet the needsof a vigorously
developingeconomycompetentlyand alsocleaveto honesty
is not yet in. N o doubt, needed changeswill occur in gradual,
evolutionary stepsasoccasionrequires—or not at all. The pro—
fessionis split amongthosewho arguethe wisdom of adopt—
ing pioneering accounting rules, and those who condemn
them. This is not a matter of good guys versusbad guys; the
virtues of both schools of thought are needed to facilitate in—
novative solutions to current problems. The vices of both
schoolsof thought are old and tiresome: fraud, image making,
contriveddenial,spin—doctoring.

CHAPTER

SEVEN

Unwinding Vicious Spirals

Interlocked problems, intractably spiraling downward andjoin—
ing with otherproblemsinto amalgamateddeclines,aredaunt—
ing but not supernatural. They are tangible consequencesof
tangiblemistakesandmisfortunes.Homelessnessandunafford—
able housing, and their
rootsin the GreatDepressionof the 19305andin thewaryears
that followed: people could not afford to build in the 19305,
and during the war both construction materials and skilled
workers drained into urgent war work insteadof into postpon—
able civilian needs.

ramincations, have direct and tangible

Another tangiblemark of thosefifteen years,which seems
to be lessvividly remembered, was growing shabbinessand
dilapidation. Not
that there had previously been any shortage
of shanties,of wallsrotting for lack of paint, or of roofsleak—
ing for lack of patches,but nfteenyearselapsedwhen owners
who would normally have renovated existing buildings, or at
least maintained them, let things deteriorate; they had little

14o / DARK AGE AHEAD

choice. What had been pockets of dilapidation became
shockingly larger.

The major wayin which householdshit by the Depression
got by was doubling up: overcrowding. Cheap placesfor rent
were abundant.In Manhattan,where I wasliving at the time,
nothing waseasierthan nndinganapartmentof whateversize
one specined,in almost whichever neighborhood one speci—
ned.That is why a stenographerearning$12 a week,joined
by one or two other women of similarly slender means,could
be offeredsomanychoicesof nnanciallyfeasiblequarterswith
living room, kitchen, bath, and one or two bedrooms. Sta—
mina to examinedwellingson offer ran out soonerthan the
list of offerings.But abundancewas deceptive;one house—
hold’sgainwasat the expenseof anotherhousehold’slossof
its own dwelling.

In 1941, the Manhattan housing supply had tightened.
That yearthe realestateagentcould comeup with only three
good possibilities instead of
twenty or thirty, and I was glad
to havethe extra weekly dollarsfrom my move into a $15—
a—weeksecretarialjob in a steel—distributingcompany.The
tightened supply was not evident all over America. In Scran—
ton, this nrsttasteof incipient prosperityemptiedevenmore
houses—somevery desirable—than the Depression had emp—
tied, becauseScranton was not acquiring new jobs. To nnd
them,
residents left, some for New York, as I
previouslyhad,but mostfor Bridgeport, Connecticut,andthe
Baltimore area to take work in brassfoundries, steel rolling—
mills, and other heavy industries. Pioneers among these mi—
grants took in later Scranton migrants, until employers saw to
it that
tracts of cramped houses, meeting minimum standards,
were thrown up and reservedfor workers in war plants.

thousands of

UNWINDING

VICIOUS

SPIRALS

/

I41

Scrantonand a few other pocketsof persistenteconomic
rental dwellings rapidly became
stagnation notwithstanding,
more costly and scarcealmost everywhere. In Manhattan, my
husbandand I took in two friends asroomers;they helped
carrythe rising rent.One, the wife of anavalofncerwho was
soon to servein the South Pacinc,put asidework on her
PhD. history of
the cutlery industry in the Connecticut
River Valleyto introduce women factory workers migrating
from the rural South to the intricacies of collective bargaining.
The other, a teacher from Nova Scotia, worked in a super—
secret Canadian and British intelligence ofnce that purchased
necessitiesfor spiesand commandoraidersand servedasan
American base for European code—breakersand other valu—
able geniuses.But we learned never so much asa hint of this
until she came for a visit about ten years after the war had
ended, so unostentatiously silent had she been about the na—
ture of her work; we had not even known that she worked in
a Rockefeller Center skyscraper, or her telephone number
there.

By the end of the war, the affordablehousingshortagein
New York and elsewhere was so acute, and evictions were so
alarmingly common, that the shortagehad becomea crisis.
Public policies to addressit fell into three approaches:(1) court—
enforced rent controls; (2) slum clearanceand subsidizedhous—
ing projects for low—incomeveteransand others whose incomes
qualined them for preference; and (3) long—termlow—interest
mortgages, guaranteed by government agencies, to encour—
ageconstructionfor home ownership.The secondandthird
approacheshad been tentatively begun on small scalesduring
the Depression, then had been largely halted during the war,
and resumed robustly after the war.

r42 / DARK AGE AHEAD

Rent controlshelpedchecktheavariceof profiteeringland—

lords. Evictions for inability to meet rent increasesdiminished
or halted. But otherwise, on balance, rent control was counter—
productive, becauseit did nothing to correct the core problem,
the lack of new or decently maintained affordablehousing, the
missingsupplythat wasa legacyof nfteenyearsof depression
and war. Some landlords, who claimed that their buildings
could no longer earn enough to pay their property taxesand
their heating and other maintenance costs,which was some—
timestrue andsometimesnot, stoppedpayingtaxesandtaking
responsibility for their buildings, leaving them to deteriorate
further, be looted, or be occupied by drug dealers, a newly
burgeoning phenomenon in the city Abandoned buildings in
New York, which eventually numbered in the thousands,were
usually in areasthat had become so dilapidated during the De—
pressionandthe war that ownersjudged (erroneously)that they
could never recover value in the future, and refused to correct
nre, structural, and other serious safety violations. Other
land—
lordsfoundloopholesin thelaw,for exampleconvertingformer
family—sizedapartments into severaltiny units, locally known
asbirth—controlapartments.Theselookedgoodin thedwelling
statisticsand won court approvalsfor rent increasesthat, in ag—
gregate,raisedbuilding yields, but meant only hardship and loss
of community for evictedfamiliesand placedstill more de—
mand on the inadequate supply.Hidden but appreciablecosts
of rent controls were the efforts and legal coststhat landlords
devoted to combat againsttenantsand their advocates(combats
which the landlords did not alwayswin) and the savingsand ef—
forts that tenants put into battles (which they did not always
win). A social cost was the conversion of
formerly tranquil
areasinto continuousbattlefieldsof predatorsversusprey

UNWINDING

VICIOUS

SPIRALS

/

I43

Slum clearancewas even more counterproductive. This ap—
proach seemed superncially plausible because solid mainte—
nance and renovation work had unavoidably been neglected
during the Depressionandwar years,andtheneglectshowed.
Dilapidatedareasweredesignatedfor future clearanceandre—
placement,it was promised, by “decent, safeand sanitary
dwellings,” the routine reassuranceof planners and politicians
at the time. Slum designationswere reinforced by bank “red—
lining,” meaning denial of property loans, not on account of
poor creditworthiness of applicants or even the condition of
the buildings themselves, but on account of
location in a
neighborhood designatedfor clearance.Loan famine added
to shelter famine. Redlining was one reason buildings were
abandoned by owners.

Theoretically,people displacedfrom their homesby slum
in the new, subsidized

clearance were to be accommodated
buildings if (or while) their incomes were low enough to qual—
ify them. But things seldom worked out that way.Planning fads
and architectural fashionsof the time emphasizedthe desirabil—
ity of empty,open spaces;thus replacementbuildingsusually
provided fewer affordabledwellings than the numbers de—
stroyed.Yearspassedbetween evictions from the old and con—
struction of the new During theseperiods, when housing had
simply beensubtracted,not added,redlineddistrictsand ex—
propriated or abandoned buildings were sometimes used for
relocation.Evictedpeoplewere stuffedinto them astransient
and deprived populations, which led to further building and
community deterioration, both physical and social.

When thenew slum—replacementhousingwasbuilt, it didn’t
wear well, physically or socially The projectswere so badly sited
and designed, so autocratically run, and so discouraging to

I44 / DARK AGE AHEAD

wholesome community life that soon they began to be aban—
doned by people who could nnd any other accommodation.
The explosive demolition by St. Louis housing ofncials of a
building in the huge, notorious Pruitt—Igoehousing project be—
came a spectacularsymbol of slum—clearancefailures. By the
mid—1990s,an estimatedeleventhousandunits of unsalvageable
subsidizedhousing for the poor were being demolished in the
United Stateseachyear.Only about four thousandreplacement
units were being constructed per year. Salvageattempts were
made but were seldomwell conceived or successful.

After 1949, the many governmental attacks on affordable

housingwereintensinedby land clearancesof low—costhous—
ing for urban renewal projects, intended for middle—and
high—incomeresidents, and after 1956 by subsidized highway
programs,all of which targetedso—calledslumswhen they
could be found. Sometimes the “slums” were inherently such
desirableareaswith suchattractivecommunity life that gen—
triners in possessionof savingsand do—it—yourselfresource—
fulnessachievedrenovationsthat public policy and nnancial
redlining denied them. Frequently they needed to nght inter—
locked establishmentsof developers;philanthropists;plan—
ners; architects;
federal, state, and local bureaucrats; and elected
ofncials to savetheir spontaneously rejuvenating areasfrom
destruction. Usually they lost these battles.

In the 19605 and early 19705,young families got into the
the post—Vietnam War innation again
housing market. But
pushed house prices and interest ratesfar beyond reach of the
poor

The third approach,promotion of home ownership by long—
term, low—interestmortgages, was the only public policy that
signincantly added to the supply of dwellings. But again, the

UNWINDING

VICIOUS

SPIRALS

/

I45

increased supply was not availableto the working poor or to
the disabled and others on welfare. Standardsand regulations
accompanyingthe government—guaranteedmortgages,rein—
forced by local zoning codes, mandated suburban sprawl.
Sprawl and its consequencesare expensive. It is no wonder,
given this history, that homelessnesshasincreasedin North
America and so hasthe number of families who cannot afford
to feedand clothe themselvesafterthey pay half or more of
their income for rent in the struggle to avoid homelessness.
How could the consequencesof half a century of destructive
housing policies be beneficial?

One more pieceof this puzzledemandsattention,because
invariably, in the
the land converted to suburban

it may hold the clue to a remedy Almost
United States and Canada,
sprawlwasfarmland, traditionally owned and worked asfamily—
sized farms. Many farm families were not able to make a rea—
sonableliving nom their farms, especiallywhen they reckoned
their own unremitting, hard labor asa cost. Capital costs for
machines and other operating needskept them alwaysin debt
or in danger of defaulting on interest payments. Commodity
prices for wheat and other cash crops in years of abundance
were sometimes so low that harvests hardly met
the costs
their production. High capital costs and low commodity
of
prices were both owing to the fact that tractors, electricity, ir—
rigation piping, and other technology had transformed agri—
culture. As farmers reached retirement age,it often happened
that none of
their children, or other heirs, wished to take on
the burdensof farming. They were awareof other possible
lives, lessfilled with anxiety and drudgery.

A way out wasto sellthe farm—better that than to seeit
foreclosed.Selling could bring in money to pay off debts, and

146 / DARK AGE AHEAD

even afford a retirement nest egg; part of the saleprice could
go into household labor saving devices,releasingfarm women
to take wage—earningjobs or go into small businessfor them—
selves.Most important, selling the land could supply a stake
for children and grandchildrento learn skilledtradesor pro—
fessions.Two, sometimesthree,generationsof a farm family,
along with their land, entered the postagrarian economy to—
gether.

If the farm was distant from suburb—forminglarge cities, its
purchaserswere apt to be proprietors of huge factory farms,
executives and absenteeowners who did not farm personally
except possibly asa hobby and were seeking to increasetheir
acreage.But if the farm was at a fringe of a large city, the best
offer was apt to be from developers of suburban sprawl.
Sprawl,by dennition,is not anintensiveuseof land,but it is
more intensive than agriculture, which is why land prices
were high enough for farm families to sell their land willingly,
even eagerly, to developers who planned to take it out of
farming. Developers and farmers were mutually solving their
problems in win—win transactions.Agricultural or park green—
belts that had been designated to encircle cities and constrict
their geographicalgrowth, and land zoned for agriculture,
melted away under the pressure.Only outright purchasesof
land by public bodies, or gifts to conser—
former agricultural
vation organizations, were able to preserve fragments of for—
mer rural
landscapesin suburban sprawl. For a society to be
able to withdraw so much land from agriculture was an un—
precedented economic luxury, but
the same changes that
were enabling 3 to 4 percent of a population to produce food
for the other 96 percentwere making withdrawalsof small
farms for other uses economically feasible. Wasteful use of

UNWINDING

VICIOUS

SPIRALS

/

I47

land became feasiblebecausethe land was put to different but
more intensive use than formerly.

that happens, suburban sprawl will

Sprawl can become less wasteful only by being used still
more intensively. If
turn
out to have been an interim stage,a transition between land
in agriculturaluseandland denselyenoughoccupiedto sup—
port masstransit, to form functional and inclusive communi—
ties, to reduce car dependency, and to alleviate shortages of
affordable housing. What kind of pressure can make it not
only feasiblebut necessaryfor present owners of sprawl to in—
tensify use of the land, like the farmers before them? A force
answering to that description need not be contrived artifi—
cially If it were,it probablywouldn’t work anybetterthanthe
policies of rent control, redlining, and clearances,the contrived
socialengineeringthat yieldedhomelessnessandhelpederase
communities.

In 2011, the first of the postwar baby boomers will
turn sixty—
five, and many of those not already laid off by downsizing or
bankrupt corporations or by cheeseparing “reinvented” gov—
ernments will choose to retire.
the crestof the babyboom, will becomea noodof aspirants
to retirement, with significant numbers still to come in the
neXt six years. Many, perhaps most, are counting on their
largest signincant assets,their houses and lots, for retirement
nest eggs,or perhaps to provide educational funds—or, more
realistically, credentialingfunds—for grandchildren.

those born in 1950,

In 2015,

Perhapsmoney will keep growing on houses, indefinitely.
That will
In March 2003, a former
Federal Reserve governor, Lyle Gramley, was quoted by The
New YorkTimesassayingthat Alan Greenspan,chairmanof

take some contriving.

148 / DARK AGE AHEAD

the FederalReserveBoard,hadmeansfor pushingthirty—year
mortgage rates aslow as2.5 percent and keeping them there,
andthe Timespointed out, accurately,that this policy would
continue to stoke“a storm of home buying andrennancing,
promoting consumers to convert the rising equity in value of
their homes to cash.
But this easymoney has done noth—
ing to rejuvenate businessspending, and a growing number of
economists suspectthat war jitters are not the only reason.”

. . .

In other words, the house price bubble can possibly be de—
liberately maintained for years to come. But even asGramley
was being quoted, in both the United Statesand Canada va—
cancy rateswere rising in condominiums, and apartment and
house prices and rents were falling in London—not enough
to solvethe shortageof affordablehousingfor the poor, but
signaling that supply and demand are slowly converging. In
any case,sooner or later the bubble must burst, asinevitably
all speculativebubblesdo when their surfacesare not sup—
ported by commensurate increasesin economic production.
When the housingbubble bursts,whether before or during
the coming demographic bulge in retirements, the force driv—
ing densificationof suburbscouldbecomeirresistiblein some
places, overriding zoning and other regulations asowners of
suburban houses and land discover that these can no longer
supply cashpassivelybut must somehow earn it instead.

Most owners of suburban lots who feel that pressurewill
no doubt selltheir land andbuildingsto developerswho plan
them to more intensive use by building apartment
to put
houses,
and spaces for small busi—
low—cost condominiums,
nesses—orfor whatever other markets promise to be most re—
munerative. But some resourceful owners will convert their
rec rooms to low—costrental suites, and others may notice

UNWINDING

VICIOUS

SPIRALS

/

I49

rear, which

they can either

that their lots can accommodate one or two small buildings at
their
rent or move into them—
selves,reducingtheir choresand other upkeep.This will free
up their former home and its garagesfor another family, a
bed—and—breakfast,a hair salon, a funeral home, or offices for
voluntary institutions or for someof the lawyerswho will be
needed to handle all the new contracts people are signing.
Any number of other possibilitiescanbe visualized:studios,
If lessadventurous owners seethat such
child care centers. . . .
experiments are producing incomes, they will
imitate them.
From the viewpoint of society, it will be preferable for
owners themselvesto put their lots to more intensive use be—
causetheir ingenuitieswill not necessarilyrequiredemolition
of still serviceablebuildings,asdevelopers’ambitionsareprone
to do, and will almost certainly introduce wider rangesof
uses, as well as charm.

Even the roads can respond to densification schemes.Not
all roadsare community killers like those that have become so
common in North America and in countries innuenced by
North American highway planning. Someroadsarefamous
for fostering community life, asthey bring people into casual,
pleasant,and frequent face—to—facecontact with one another.
Many an ordinary Main Street used to do these services,but
Main Streetshaveprovedeasilytransformableinto bleak,stan—
dardized community killers.

Another kind of road, the boulevard, is capableof serving a
district’s full ranges of mobility: walks for pedestrians; lanes
alongsidethem for bicyclers and roller skaters;lanesfor public
transit vehicles, and separatechannels for automotive vehicles
passingthrough and those heading for local destinations.Versa—
tile boulevards are little known in North America, and those

150 / DARK AGE AHEAD

that do exist are seldom more than ghostsof what they could
be.But elsewherein the world, especiallyin placeswith Mediter—
raneancultures,boulevardsareplacesto which peoplenockfor
astrollwhen their day’swork is done,to seethe neighbors,get
word of strangers,pick up other news, and enjoy a coffee or a
beeranda chatwhile they takein the passingscene,including
sidewalkplay of children. Peoplein cities and neighborhoods in
much of
the world understand their boulevards to be at the
heart of their communities. A well—designedboulevard is al—
wayswell provided with treesalong its margins and its medians,
becausea major concern of serious boulevard designersis to
createenvironments welcoming to pedestrians.

Traffic engineersin North America firmly outlaw,asun—

channels for local—destination
safe, boulevard trees and turnoff
vehicles. Traffic carnage is so high and ubiquitous that it
is
sensibleto give urgent priority to safety.But how do experts
and teachers and textbooks know that trees and other boule—
vard features are unsafe? They don’t know, say the authors
of TheBoulevardBoole,an exhaustivestudy of boulevardsin
the United States,France, Spain, Portugal, Italy, India, Viet—
nam, Australia, and Latin America. The authors studied acci—
dents and reasonsfor them and identified specific design
naws; they found that boulevards the world over have nne
safetyrecordsfor all the kinds of mobility they serve.Read—
ers of previous chapters in this book will not be surprised at
the real shocker: search asthey might,
the authors found no
studies or other evidence to support the recommendations
against boulevards by North American traffic engineers or
the conclusions and design exercisessetforth in textbooks for
university students.These were basedon wholly unsupported
dogma,nothing more.

UNWINDING

VICIOUS

SPIRALS

/

ISI

they could not

Often when presenting designsto trafnc ofncialswe were
told that a particular arrangementwould not be safe.If we
asked ofncials how they knew that,
tell us.
When we started our inquiries, we were advised on many
occasionsthat both trafnc and accident datawere available
for particular streets . . .
wasrarely found.
What wasthe basisof the conclusion
that boulevardsareunsaferelativeto other streets?We have
yet to nnd satisfactoryanswersto that question.

but, sadly, the safety information

. . .

The authorsconclude that the thin air from which the dogma
derives in this caseis an unexamined belief
that boulevards
are “heretical” becausethey embrace complexity and coexis—
tence of multiple movements and users.

An unpopulatedboulevardis, of course,just anotherway
to waste money and land and to disappoint expectations, but
it may be that when a formerly sprawling suburb becomes
denseenough to populate a boulevard with strollers, users of
masstransit, and errand goers, it will also have enough clout
to lobby for a boulevard, and win it,
to replace a stretch of
bleakandmore dangerouslimited—accesshighway.

Those who love their suburbs as they are, and want to pass
them on inviolateto posterity,will not welcometheincreased
densitiesand additional usesI havepostulated, no matter how
enthusiastically they hail “smart growth”
in the abstract.Here
farmers who sold their land. They
we must think again of
sometimes sold it regretfully, becausethey loved their nelds,
orchards, streams, wetlands, and woodlots. They gave in when
theseloved assetscould no longer sustainthem or justify the
work of maintaining them. Old suburbanresidentswell

152 / DARK AGE AHEAD

enough off to retain their loved houses,garages,driveways, and
lawns will be pained at changeswrought by densification, es—
pecially if new residents,businessproprietors, workers and
customers,schoolteachersand children include immigrants
from Asia, the Middle East, Africa, South America, and do—
mesticcities,asthey most certainlywill. Suburbanbirthrates
are typically not high enough for signincant densification. A
majority of landownersin somesuburbsmaymaintainthe sta—
tus quo. Holdouts will be suburbs nozen in time,
to be re—
garded in future as interesting twentieth—century museum
pieces, much as frozen Victorian small towns are interesting
nineteenth—centurymuseumpieces.After Victorian architec—
ture fell out of
fashion, it was popularly scorned as hideous
and for almost a century was treated insensitively at best and
ruthlessly at worst, before its appealwas rediscovered.We may
expect that frozen suburban sprawlswill endure a similar fash—
ion cycle.

Accounts of breakdownsaretedious.Seenfrom a distance—his—
torical, geographic,administrative,or emotional distance—they
make succinct stories. But
in close—upview, they consist of
too many details,none sufficient in itself; the piecesmake
senseonly when considered together.

Whether densification actually can improve suburbs as
places in which to live, work, have fun,
learn, and raise fam—
ilieswill not dependon adherenceto abstractionslike demin-
cationand smartgrowth, but rather on tangible, boring details.
Wrong details can all too easily create messesugly to behold
and unpleasantto live with. Suburbanitessuspiciousof change
should not be dismissedas selfishproponentsof NIMBY
in my back yard”). They have a point worth heeding:
(“Not
things can be made worse, not better. They often have been,

UNWINDING

VICIOUS

SPIRALS

/

153

underthe bannersof goodintentions.“God is in the details,”
asMies van der Rohe famously said. In wretched outcomes,
the devil is in the details.

Rules and regulations will be absolutely necessaryto over—
come suburban sprawl decently—but not the samerules and
regulations that created and encouraged sprawl. Here we
must nnally confront yet another unexamined old set of sup—
positionsand tools. Only after 1916did zoning take an ap—
preciable hold on North American culture. The three big
ideasthat shapedzoning were these:

High ground coveragesarebad.

High densities(numbers of people or numbers of house—
holds per acre)arebad.
The mingling
idences is bad.

uses with res—

or other work

of commercial

All

three assumptions are rejections of cities and city life,
devised by utopians and reformers who tried to overcome
public health problems and “disorder” with these abstract,
dysfunctional solutions. To this day,the three assumptionsre—
main the principal
tools of planners and zoners. Even those
who do not reject citiesand their values,or think they don’t
reject them, continue to use these three tools—ground cov—
erages,densities,and land uses—asframeworksfor shaping
built environments. The tools areunsuitable except for creating
sprawl, even when they are subject to appealsand amended
into incoherence, asoften happens.

Zoning rules and tools neglect performancesthat outrage
people. What are actually needed are prohibitions of destruc—
tive performances. To attend hearings on zoning and planning

154 / DARK AGE AHEAD

connictsisto learn that fearedchangesarenot actuallyaboutland
uses,densities,and ground coveragebut rather about dreaded
sideeffects.The fearsfall chienyin thefollowingcategories:

1. Noise from mechanicalsources
2. Bad smellsand other forms of air pollution; alsowater

pollution and toxic pollution of soil

3. Heavy automotive through—traffic and heavy local

truck traffic
4. Destruction

of parks,

loved buildings, views, wood—

lands,and accessto sun and sky
5. Blighting signsand illumination
6. Transgressionsagainstharmonious streetscales.

Any enforceable code depends upon specinc standards;an
effective performancecodemust, too. Obnoxious levels of me—
chanical or amplified sound can be specified asdecibels from
a building or its outdoor property. How an enterprise confines
soundswithin its premiseswould be no concern of the code.
Odors pose a unique problem for a performance code
becausethe senseof smell is still so little understood that ob—
jective measurementsof odor intensity,and quality,arenon—
existent. However, we are almost all in subjective agreement
aboutwhat smellsbad.Odorsemanatingfrom sewage,rotting
food, penned herds of animals, slaughterhouses,and chemi—
cals draw vociferous protests. Aromas from bakeries, restau—
rants, and backyard barbecues seldom do, unless the food is
burning.
It would be best for a performance code to accept
subjective, popular judgments about offensive smells. How—
ever, measurementsof particulate matter and chemicals in the
air can be expressedas standardsapplying to pollution from

UNWINDING

VICIOUS

SPIRALS

/

155

smokestacksand incinerators. Measurementsalso exist for
water and land pollution,
including ecologically destructive
temperatures of water released from processing plants, and
toxic pollution from leaking landnlls.A chief advantageof
performance codes,especiallythose updated in light of chang—
ing technologies,will be the incentive they offer to solve
practical problems that
traditional zoning tried to “solve”
merely by banishingoffendersto poor or politically disre—
garded parts of town or, recently, to politically feeble parts of
the globe.

Protestors against blight do not advocate, to my knowl—
edge, bland little standardizedsignsand dim lighting (al—
though some architects do); neighborhoods
the effectof abillboard city in which giant or glaring adver—
tising signscompete with one another. Maximum dimensions
of signsand maximum candlepower of outdoor illumination
can be specified.

do fear, however,

Building heights and—even more important—length of un—
broken streetfrontagesof buildings can be specined,with stan—
dardsvaryingfor streetswith varyingexistingscalesof height
andfrontages.Scaleisnot merelyamatterof estheticsandtaste,
althoughhow things look is important. Scaleconnectswith
many other aspectsof performance; theseconnections areoften
really at issue in connicts ostensibly about uses, densities, or
ground coverage.For example,height affectsthe accessof streets
or neighboring buildings to sun, sky, and views. Big buildings
cast big shadows.They also commonly require demolition of
historic or other loved buildings.Maximum horizontal street
frontageallowablefor anenterprisecouldaccommodateacabi—
netmaker’sor carpenter’sshop, but not a large furniture factory
with its heavy and noisy truck traffic.

156 / DARK AGE AHEAD

We are left with destructive behavior of individuals, nom
which residents and property owners want protection. For
example,althoughpeopleseldomobjectto unamplifiedvoices
in conversation, objectors to permits for outdoor cafésor bars
cite louts in the earlymorning hours who shoutangrily and
who urinate on walkwaysandprivateproperty,andsicknaifs
who vomit on walks and gardens.While these and other mis—
demeanors are indeed matters of performance, they are best
dealt with by police and bar owners. Trying to control bad be—
havior or crimes such as drunk driving obliquely by land use
rules doesn’t work, and banishes much that is constructive.
In—
sofar asland usesarepertinent to misbehavior, too much of the
samething, unalleviatedby other uses—whetherresidences,
bars and clubs, schools, or catchall cultural centers—doesn’t
work constructively.In cities,differing usesin closeproxim—
ity tame one another. Even concentrated genteel concert and
theater centers from which hordes of people emerge simulta—
neously, all wanting to nab taxis or buy a drink, breed pushi—
nessand other bad manners.

Agreementto meetprovisionsof aperformancecodethat
hasbeenadoptedshouldbe a condition of leasing,renting,
buying, or building in a densifying suburb. Enforcement
should not be ensured by criminal
fines but more directly, by
civil court orders requiring noncomplying and noncorrecting
offenders to halt outlawed performances forthwith or vacate
the premises.The reward for complying is freedom to locate
in a popular, performance—protected district and the advan—
tage of being protected too. Another advantage is easycon—
vertibility of premisesfrom one useto another,aprocessthat
can take years and incur huge legal costs under traditional
zoning codes.

UNWINDING

VICIOUS

SPIRALS

/

157

The categoriesof contention that I’ve listed arenot ex—
haustive, and no code can remain static. Obnoxious perfor—
mances of which we now have no idea will doubtless appear
in future, while others will become obsolete, just asthe ny—
breedingmanurepilesof livery stablesbecameobsoleteand,
incidentally, at one time, were main reasonsfor forbidding
outdoor cafesand restaurantsasunsanitary.

The object of a good performance code should be to com—
bine the greatestdegree of nexibility and adaptability possible
with the most germaneand direct protectionsneededin the
close—upview. The training and credentialing of planners and
zonersdoesnot equip them for this task,nor doestheir work ex—
perience.Perhapscollaborationwith bright andopen—minded
young lawyerswith a yearningfor public servicecanhelp to
break this new ground. Formulating performance codes will
take experimenting, creativity, and respectful attention to pub—
lic fearsaswell ashopes.The lesstime lostin starting,thebetter.
is the optimistic view. Pessimistically, we must re—
memberthat the vicious spiralof interlockedhousingshort—
agesfor the poor, lossof inclusive communities, and excessive
car dependency had its origins in fifteen years of depression
and war. Unwinding that vicious spiral requires peace and
prosperity: people must be able to afford sprawl—transforming
densificationsand renovations.Another rerun of depression
and war, stagnation and cutbacks could write finis perma—
nently to the chancesof North Americansunwinding thisvi—
cious spiral.

That

One advantagepossessedby measuresto repair sprawl is that
sprawl is so clearly wasteful and inefficient. North Americans
prize efficiency The folk heroes of efficiency of scale—Eli

158 / DARK AGE AHEAD

Whitney, Henry Ford, and legions of efficiency experts in
their wakes—long ago convinced North American politi—
ciansand populationsthat economiesof scalewere respon—
siblefor America’shigh standardsof living, which isindeeda
partial truth. When items being processedareidentical to one
another,like pantyhoseor partsfor cotton gins,cars,or other
machines whose development and design are already accom—
plished facts, economiesof scaleare easily achieved.The
more identical items that areprocessed,the lessoverhead cost
each item bears, and so the less each item costs.

But efficiency is not a key to unwinding the vicious spiral
of credentialing, atrophy of the scientific state of mind, and
failures of professionalself—policing.These are interlocked
evidence of cultural failures to teach and to learn.

The close—upclues to wrong turnings in teaching and
learning were identified quickly by 19605studentswho com—
plainedthat they werebeing cheatedof their universityedu—
cations by being treated like raw materials fed into impersonal
production lines.

When humanbeingsarenurtured,efficiencyandeconomies
of scaledon’t apply.Helping individualsbecomeacceptable
and fulfilled members of a culture takes generous individual
attention to eachone, usuallyfrom numerouspeople. Many au—
tobiographies and memoirs attest gratefully to just such life—
saving and morale—boostingattention.

At some point

in their mentoring,

accountants, priests, and
other learned professionalswho achieved the careersof their
dreams,but who then failed to meet their ethical and profes—
sionalresponsibilities,werenot sufficientlyeducatedto adhere
to civilized standardsexpected by the culture. Like children,
professionalsneedto be taughtright andwrong, andwhy.

Soon after university credentialing took hold, overbur—

UNWINDING

VICIOUS

SPIRALS

/

159

denedprofessorsfound that manyelementaryandhigh school
students had been processed,presumably efficiently, in large
lots, but processedso inadequately that they needed remedial
work in numeracy, reading comprehension, and expository
writing before they could be efficiently credentialed in uni—
versities.Nurturing andinstructing human beingsin a com—
plex culture demands redundancy of mentors and examples.
Redundancy is expensive but
indispensable. Perhaps this is
merely to point out that life is expensive.Just to keep itself
going, life makes demands on energy, supplied from inside
and outside a living being, that are voracious compared with
the undemandingthriftiness of death and decay.A culture,
just to keep itself going, makesvoracious demandson the en—
ergies of many people for hands—onmentoring.

When our own society was much poorer than it is today, it
neverthelessmanagedto meet the inherent expensesand ineffi—
ciencies associatedwith its continuation. How did it do this?
How do poor but vigorous cultures managetheir continuation
today?The answeris that all culturesdependheavily,or havede—
pended heavily in the past, on the natural redundanciesto be
found in their communities: varied individuals who havevaried
ways of fitting into the culture and contributing to it. Even a
poor society can afford redundancy of mentors and examples,
becausepeoplein their communitiesfill thoserolesby the way,
while enjoying themselves or earning their livings by other
means:storytellers, skilled tradespeopleand craftspeople,musi—
cians, bird—watchersand other nature hobbyists, artists,adven—
feminists, cosmopolitans, poets, volunteers and activists,
turers,
chessplayers,domino players,moralists, life—taughtand book—
taught philosophers—visible in a community, but invisible to
the young when community becomesinvisible.

In cultures so deteriorated that nurturing and educating

160 / DARK AGE AHEAD

arein short supply,most of the intellectualand other advan—
tagesbecome reserved for an elite. This is what happened in
feudalEurope during the Dark Age following Rome’s col—
lapse. Redundancy was rationed as an extravagance when
there wasn’t enough of it to go around. A fortunate few got
tutors andculturalmentors.The restwent without. And even
the fortunate few, many of
them, were round pegsjammed
into squareholes. Perhapsthe greatestfolly possible for a cul—
ture is to try to passitself on by using principles of efnciency
When a culture is rich enough and inherently complex
enough to afford redundancy of nurturers, but eliminatesthem
as an extravaganceor losestheir cultural servicesthrough
heedlessnessof what is being lost, the consequenceis self—
innictedcultural genocide.Then watch the vicious spiralsgo
into action!

CHAPTER

EIGHT

Dark Age Patterns

As Homo sapicnsspreadover the earth nom our species’place
or placesof origin in Anica, hundreds,perhapsthousands,of
the unequal connicts cited by Diamond (p. 11ff.) must have
occurred, followed by countlessDark Ages and extinctions
sufferedby culturallosers.Then, ten or twelvethousandyears
ago,the human race startedto adopt a radically new economy:
agriculture and pastoralism.The old hunting and gathering
cultures, which also bartered in found objects such ashorns,
bones, shells,and reeds;obsidian and red ocher; gold, tin, and
copper lodged in surfacepockets; wild honey, amber, and cap—
tured wild animals, were destined for unprecedented crisis.
Henceforth,
foraging societies were on the defensive against
more powerful agrarian cultures. Foragers resisted, especially
those basedin mountains and inaccessiblewilderness. Some—
times they temporarily made accommodations to agrarian cul—
tures,

for instance as concubines,

slave traders, or warriors

in

162 / DARK AGE AHEAD

serviceto farmers,but they could not prevailagainstthe dom—
inant new culturesandtheir economies.

With the emergenceof agriculture, the world wasnever
again asit had previously been. Almost everywhere, the pris—
tine economiesand their cultureswent down to defeatand
memory loss.

During the ten or twelve thousand years since the emer—
genceof agriculture, agrarianismhasdominated the world and
the goalsof statesand empires, shaping their politics, military
ambitions, institutions, organizational abilities, fears, and be—
liefs. Societies most successfulat feeding their people from
arable land, pastures, orchards, and gardens have been cultural
winners and empire builders,just asDiamond found in his
analyses.

But that is no longer true. Radical change,comparablein
to the introduction of agriculture, hasbeen accru—
its import
ing. I have alluded to it from time to time in the preceding
pages.Now it is the turn of agrarianism to become a cultural
loser.Though not everyoneis well fed, the need to eat no
longer dictatesthat mostpeople,or evenahigh proportion in
the West,must live on the land or otherwisework directly
with plant and animal production. This changehasbeen a
long and gradual time in the making, but is now so dominant
that it amountsto a qualitativechangein everyfacetof life.
Already the world displaysa previously unimaginable redun—
dancy of idled breadbaskets.Upstate New York, for example,
once the breadbasketof the northeasternU.S.seaboard,lost
out to the fields of
the midwestern and western prairies, as
did the Ottawa Valley and the Maritime Provinces, once the
breadbasketsof easternCanada.Argentina,Uruguay,Ukraine,
and Sicily, once great breadbasketsfeeding much of the world,

DARK AGE PATTERNS / 163

became economic problems rather than solutions, ashave the
prairie provinces of Canada, along with some prairie heart—
lands of the United States.

Would—beempire builders have been slowestto take in the
greatchangeandits importance.The Germans,who initiated
the twentieth—centuryworld wars, forthrightly justined the
wars asdriven by need for Lebemmum,room to live. We may
speculatethat chiefs and elders of hunting societies,ten thou—
sand years ago, were similarly slow to acknowledge that a
sourceof wealth differentfrom foragingandtreasure—finding
territory had come to dominate the vanishing world they had
known so well. No longer is territory a zero—sumpossession
of statesandempires.Separationsandother causesof territo—
rial loss can be win—win events instead of reasonsfor war or
precursors to poverty and failure.

revolution,

Dismayed at the distraught modern world, we may be ex—
cusedfor supposingit to be in unprecedented crisis.Ingenuity,
the new wealth that carries cultural dominance, has generated
the industrial
the scientific state of mind and its
yields, the rise of democracy,the emergenceof a middle class.
In sum, human knowledge and skills, and opportunities to use
them effectively, have created modern, postagrarian societies.
These sameassetshaveprovided sufficient stability and correc—
tions (sofar) for postagrarianlife to sustainitself

Human capital, per se,is of course not new. It is older than
agriculture,for itspresencecanbe discernedin preagricultural
Cro—Magnon cave art, in burial decorations, and in prehistoric
wind andpercussionmusicalinstruments.Creativityandabil—
ity to accumulate skills and knowledge areinborn capacitiesof
anatomicallymodern human beings,much aslanguageis an
inborn capacity

164 / DARK AGE AHEAD

Postagrarianstatesdo not increasetheir wealth by aggran—
dizing territories and seizing lands and natural resources—as
Japan and Germany learned after losing World War II and
subsequently prospering by other means. The key to post—
agrarian wealth is the complicated task of nurturing economic
diversity, opportunity, and peacewithout
resort to oppression.
Dark Ages and spirals of decline are in prospect for agrarian
culturesthatcan’tadaptthemselvesto generatingwealththrough
human ingenuity, knowledge, and skills.

Karen Armstrong,

in her history Islam, summarizes the
transforming power of postagrarian culture and the social dis—
turbances it creates. Of education,

she writes:

in the modern West, where we expect

When resources were limited,
it was impossible to encour—
ageinventivenessand originality in the way that we [have
to know
done,]
more than our parents’ generation, and supposethat our
children will experience still greater advance.N o society
before [the postagrarian]could afford the constantretrain—
ing of personnel andreplacementof the infrastructure that
innovation on this scaledemands.Consequently,in all pre—
modern societies,including that of agrarianEurope, edu—
cation was designedto put a brake on the ingenuity and
curiosity of
the individual, which could undermine the
that had no means of integrating
stability of a community
or exploiting fresh insights.
[P]upils learned old texts
and commentaries by heart, and the teaching consisted of
a word—by—wordexplication of a standardtextbook. Pub—
lic disputationsbetween scholarstook for granted that one
of the debaterswasright and the other wrong. There was
no idea
opposing positions to build
a new synthesis.

of allowing the

. . .

. . .

. . .

DARK AGE PATTERNS / 165

education,

While Armstrong’scommentsabovearefocusedon Middle
she has much
Eastern and Islamic fundamentalist
to sayabout the jolts administered by postagrarian cultures in
general.Of the greatMiddle Easternempires,which were all
in decline by the end of the eighteenth century, she remarks
that their decay“was not due to the essentialincompetence
or fatalism of
Islam, as Europeans often arrogantly assume.
Any agrarian polity had a limited lifespan.” Beginning in the
sixteenth century:

. . .

. . .

Western society was no longer subject to the samecon—
straints as agrarian culture.
There were new inventions
in medicine, navigation, agriculture and industry.None of
these was in itself decisive, but
their cumulative effect was
radical.By 1600innovationswere occurring on sucha scale
that progress seemed irreversible: a discovery in one field
would lead to freshinsightsin another.
Where the con—
servativesociety createdby agrarian culture had not been
able to afford such change,people in Europe and America
were becoming more confident
in the firm expectation
of continuing progressand the continuous improvement of
trade.By the time the technicalization of society had re—
sultedin the industrial revolution of the nineteenth century,
Westernersfelt such assurancethat they no longer looked
back to the past for inspiration, as in the agrarian cultures
and religions, but looked forward to the future.

. . .

An increasingnumber of people were neededto take part
in the various scientific and industrial projects at quite
factory workers—and
humble levels—as printers, clerks,
[they] had to receivesomekind of education.More people
were needed [and were able] to buy the massproduced

166 / DARK AGE AHEAD

. . .

ideals of democracy,

goods
[and so lived] above subsistencelevel. As more
of the workers becameliterate, they demanded a greater
sharein the decisionsof government. If anation wanted to
useits human resourcesto enhanceits productivity, it had
to bring groupswho hadhitherto beensegregatedandmar—
ginalized, such as the Jews, into mainstream culture.
[T]he
rights and secularismwere not simply beautiful ideals
. . .
but were, at least in part, dictated by the needs of the mod—
ern state.It wasfound that
. . . to be efficient and produc—
tive, a modern nation had to be organized on a secular,
democratic basis.But it was alsofound that if societiesdid
according to the new rational and scientinc
organize
norms,they becameindomitable andthe conventionalagrar—
ian stateswere no match for them.

. ..
human

pluralism,

toleration,

. . .

Some things remained the same.In postagrarian cultures,
asin agrarian cultures, everything connected with everything
else. In either case,if any element of
the culture strength—
ened, the entire web tended to strengthen;if any element
weakened, others alsoweakened.

The complex new culture was not asexportable,nor as
controllable when it was exported, as European imperialists
supposed.As Armstrong says:

Colonization was experiencedby the agrarian colonies as
invasive,disturbing and alien.Modernization wasinevitably
superficial,sincea processthat had takenEurope three cen—
turies hadto be achievedat top speed.Where modern ideas
had time to filter down graduallyto all classesof societyin
Europe,in the coloniesonly a smallnumber of people,who

DARK AGE PATTERNS / 167

. . .

. . .

. . .

were membersof the upper classesand—signincantly—the
military, could receivea Westerneducation.
Societywas
and increasinglyneither side could understand
divided
. . .
the other.
Those who had been left outside the mod—
ernizing process. . . were ruled by secularforeign law codes
which they could not understand.
Western buildings
“modernized” the towns, onen leaving the “old city” asa
museum piece, a tourist trap and a relic of a superseded
lost in their own countries. Above all,
age. . . .
local people of all classesof society resentedthe fact that
they were no longer in control of their own destiny.
[T]hey experienceda sinking lossof identity.

People felt

. . .

Even Western people found the transition from agrarian to
postagrarianculturespainful, and many still do. But at least
Westerners modernized at their own pace and according to
their own agendas,luxuriesdeniedmostcoloniesof the West.
In Europe and
(Hong Kong is a conspicuous exception.)
America, modernity was accompanied by increasing auton—
omy andinnovation.In coloniesof the Westit wasaccompa—
nied by loss of autonomy and by forced imitation of Western
practices, facilities, and aims.

The jolts administered to unprepared agrarian entities by
Westernempiresand later by their joint organssuchasthe
World Bank, the World Trade Organization, and the Inter—
national Monetary Fund, have alreadybrought into being
new Dark Ages,especiallyin suchAfrican countries asRwanda,
Liberia, Congo (Zaire), Sierra Leone, and Zimbabwe, aswell
asin Cambodia(Kampuchéa),and Burma (Myanmar).The
last two were notably stable and prosperous as agrarian cul—
tures and seemedto adapt comparatively smoothly to French

168 / DARK AGE AHEAD

and British overlordship, respectively. Then they sank into
postcolonial horrors.

The world today is a bewildering mosaic of cultural win—
ners, groups of people sunk into old or recent Dark Ages and
downward spirals, groups in the processof climbing out, and
remnants of preagrarian cultures, aswell asremnants of de—
clined empires. Even within
ancient, and Dark Age cultures exist.

countries, mosaics of modern,

Pockets of people patronized as quaint, or ridiculed as
fecklessandstupid,aresometimes(perhapsalways)Dark Age
populations still handicapped by the consignment of
their
culturesandidentitiesto limbo. I knew suchagroupfirsthand
in the 19305,in a bypassedpocket of the Appalachian Moun—
tainsof North Carolina.They hadlost from memory,largely
because of slowly accruing irrelevance, many of
the skills
they had brought with them from Europe and the U.S. east—
immigration into the mountains
ern seaboard before their
and isolation there. They were neither
feckless nor stupid
people, and their quaintnesswas inconsequential: sunbonnets,
homemadewitchlike brooms, safetypins called latch pins,
Sioux (the name of a neighboring hamlet) ignorantly pro—
nounced“Sigh—ox.”With help from outsidersthey regained
lost skills and with the help of returning emigrants and their
earnings,someof them took new interestin the future and
its opportunities.

North Lawndale (pp. 83—85)is part of a modern city’s mo—
saic that includes a place and a people who have sunk so
deeply into a Dark Age that they have been unable to main—
tain evenrudimentarycommunitylife.North Lawndaleandthe
Chicago mosaic are not unique in Western cities. Ours is a
tough species,but individuals and groups subjected to large
or small Dark Ages seemto need time and help to recover.

DARK AGE PATTERNS / 169

Victims of Dark Ages,especiallywhen they arespatiallyor
socially isolated, or their lossesare geographically widespread,
have often found recovery impossible, even when they have
not gone extinct. Many abyssesof massamnesiamust thus in—
tervenebetweenus andthe culturesof our ancientprogeni—
tors. Unresolvable arguments rage nowadays over whether
our early human ancestorswere sly scavengersof kills by hye—
nas,or werebold andbravepredatorsthemselves:knowledge
that slipped into limbo long ago. Other arguments rage over
whether women were always denigrated by men assecond—
classmembers of the human race: more unrecoverableknowl—
edge.Even cultures that had writing,
like the Minoan of
Crete and the successorMycenaeanculture, which appar—
ently conquered the Minoan, remain mysterious to us; a pity,
becauseMinoan art depicts gaiety,fashion, ball games,women
with an independent air, and a culture of obviously high
achievement, all gone except for its still undeciphered writ—
ing, its severaldozen stampsfor printing alphabetic signs or
words, and the cheerful, seductive traces of
its culture in its
art. We do know that the writing of
querors was directly ancestral to Greek, and hence indirectly
ancestralto our own—an achievementthey passedon before
they, too, passedinto a Dark Age limbo.

their apparentcon—

Ancient Greeks, like ancient Hebrews and groups with
stories of gods asprogenitors, retain wisps of ancient myths
wafting ghostly regrets about vanished Golden Ages.Many an
age that was Golden compared with what came after it, has
indeed vanished.

At a giventime it is hardto tell whether forcesof cultural
life or death arein the ascendancy.Is suburban sprawl, with its
murders of communities and wastesof land, time, and energy,
a sign of decay? Or

in means of overcoming

is rising interest

17o / DARK AGE AHEAD

sprawl a sign of vigor and adaptability in North American
culture? Arguably, either could turn out to be true.

Suppose,when the plaster industry and other contempo—
rary interestswere destroying the forests and future fertility of
the Fertile Crescent some two and a half millennia ago,
someone gifted with foresight had been able to offer advice.
What would have been a useful caution? I
think it would
have been, “Let
let goats eat new growth
before the land can regenerate.”

things grow Don’t

things grow. Don’t

Suppose, ten thousand years nom now, people of the fu—
ture who contemplate our own times—which they might
aptly call the midpoint crisis between their times and the ori—
gin of agriculture—askthemselveswhat, by hindsight,could
have forestalled fatal deterioration of
the wonderful North
American culture. I suspectthe advicemight be much like
that about the goats: “Let
let currently
powerful governmentor commercialenterprisesstranglenew
departures, or alternatively gobble them assoon asthey show
indications of being economic successes.Stop trying to cram
too many eggsinto too few basketsunder the keeping of too
few supermen (who don’t actually exist except in our mythos).”
If people of the distant future care suniciently and havesuffi—
ciently good documentation, they might note that an Ameri—
can presidentnamed Theodore Roosevelt, whose portrait
likeness they could still see, carved into Mount Rushmore,
had stavedoff destructive corporate cannibalism for about a
crucial half century before it was loosed in the 19605and in—
tensified in the 19805.

Climbing out of aspiralof declineor anabyssof massam—
nesiais so difficult and chancy,and entailsso many ordeals
and hardships, that a much better strategy is to avoid falling

DARK AGE PATTERNS / 171

into terminal messes.A culture that does emerge from a Dark
Age is not what a previously failed or conquered ancestral
culture would nnd recognizable. That cultures have been
drasticallyformed and deformed by waging war is a com—
monplace observation. They must also have been drastically
innuenced and shaped, physically, socially, and psychologi—
cally, by undergoing Dark Ages. The Dark Age following the
collapse of Western Rome shapedEurope into a feudal soci—
ety and culture. Many an obscure Dark Age, imposed in his—
times by conquest, has shaped many a demoralized
torical
aboriginal culture. Dark Ages are at best grim asreshapersof
human life, and unpredictable becausethey are not subject to
wish, will, or plan. They carry with them enormousinsecu—
rities, not easily shed, which only drugs or insatiable addic—
tion to power seem to assuage.

How can a culture avoid falling into a Dark Age or near
Dark Age, when that appears,objectively, to be its destiny?
Japanmanagedto evadea colonially imposed Dark Age after
CommodoreMatthew Perrybroughthisgunboatsto Tokyoin
1853, demanding that the country open its doors to trade with
the West. Previously, Japan had adopted a fortress mentality,
protectingitself from contactwith the dangerousoutsideworld
and its cultural disruptions. It continued protecting itself even
while it was catching up with the West and in the processtrans—
forming itself from an agrarian culture to an ingenuity—based,
postagrarian society Throughout
the transformation, the soci—
ety took immense care to cherish and nurture its own familiar
culturalcharacteristics.It restoredits figureheademperor,glo—
rified the idealsof its samurai,maintained its shrines,and above
all cultivated its arts and the highly developed esthetic values
they embodied. In sum,JapanassimilatedWestern waysinto its

r72 / DARK AGE AHEAD

own culture, rather than allowing its own culture to become ir—
relevant while it was emulating the West.

Japan continues deliberately to follow this policy. For
example,it vigorously maintains a program of supporting living
national treasures:people who are living masters of Japanese
arts—calligraphers, potters and glazers,drummers, gardeners,
woodcut artists, puppeteers,
traditional actors, carpenters,
and others. In return for this support, the national treasures
continue to practice their arts and passthem on to apprentices
so that neither the skillsnor the cultural valuesand identity
that they representwill be lost.Japan’sassimilation and further
developmentof Westerninnovationshasbeenunusuallysmooth,
in spite of war waged against Europe: first against Russia in
1904—5,andthen againstthe Allied powersin World War II.
ThoughJapansufferedhorribly from nearstarvation,nuclear
bombing, and bombing firestorms, followed by years under
foreign military occupation,it took from its foreign contacts,
good and bad, what
losing
cultural memory, identity, and competence.Japanis now
abreastor ahead of the West in science—basedtechnology, yet
habitually downplays its accomplishments, which avoidspro—
voking envy.

it wanted to assimilate, without

Ireland is almost miraculous in not having sunk into a Dark
Age. The conquering English, especially during their brutal
invasions, massacres,and oppressions under Elizabeth I and
Oliver Cromwell,
treated the Roman Catholic Irish as an
aboriginal people to be cleared from the land for benent of
the conquerors. Famine, Pestilence, War, and Death devas—
tatedIrelandfor centuries;its population droppedfrom nine
million to two million in the mid—nineteenth century, partly
asa result of famine but alsobecauseof English seizureof

DARK AGE PATTERNS / 173

Irish lands and forced emigration. But during all these or—
deals, the Four Horsemen of
the Apocalypse were never
joined by the fifth demonic horseman, Forgetfulness. The
Irish stubbornly remembered who they were and what they
valued, and refused to lose their treasured culture. They ac—
complished this marvel largely through the fragile medium of
song. Their songs prevented them and their progeny from
forgetting what they had lost. “Every Irish songis a songof
protest,” a lawyer in western Ireland told me when I asked
him the meaningof aplaintive,hauntingsolohe hadsungat
a feast. The Irish suffered civil war and utter contempt from
the English, who tried to convince them in every way pos—
siblethat they were innately inferior. The Irish alsosuffered
terrorism throughout the late twentieth century,much of it
self—instigatedor self—innicted;but
they never gave up on
themselvesand the culture they valued.

Song is an extremely effective way of passing a culture
down through the generations. As we all recognize, memo—
rable songsand poems that we learn when we are young stay
with us into old age.The emotional powers of the arts—
authentic arts, not official propaganda—are obviously central
to everyculture.Englandnow hasthe lowestproductivity of
any country in the European community, while the Republic
of Ireland hassurpassedit. So much for English assumptionsof
Irish (or Italian or French) inferiority.

Rome’s arts were minor in comparison with the culture’s
other achievements, and Romans themselves were conscious
that in this respectthey were not creatorsbut lived on bor—
rowings from the Greeks.This deficiency was deemed a
strengthby Virgil and the emperorAugustus.The samepas—
sageof the Aeneidthat exhortedRomansto fulfill their duty

I74 / DARK AGE AHEAD

of ruling (p. 55) treated the arts and learning as a digression
from the “real” businessof life:

Others will breathe life into bronze with more delicate
art—I know it well—will carve marble into the visageof
life, will plead casesbetter, will chart the orbits of the stars
and foretell

their risings. Your task, Roman,

. . .

Perhapsthe scanting of emotion and heart, asexpressedin
the arts,wasamajor impedimentto the enduranceof Rome’s
version of classicalculture. The lack must have helped precip—
itate Roman culture into the forgetfulness of the Dark Age as
the empire’s institutions of government, trade, and militarism
broke down.

The United Stateshas often been equated with Rome by
historians and social commentators seeking modern lessons
from Rome’s mistakes.But fortunately the two cultures differ
greatly.American culture is saturatedwith heart and emotion;
it revels in the richness of
its indigenous arts. In song alone,
America hasgospelmusic and blues;songsof labor unions,
cowboys, and chain gangs;hits from musicalsand films; coun—
rock and roll, and rap;
try music,
patriotic, war, antiwar, and seasonal songs; advertising ditties;
nursery rhymes; school, campfire, drinking, homesick, and
love songs;lullabies; revival hymns; plus disrespectfulparodies
of the lot.

jazz, ballads, sea chanteys,

from within

a dominant

If

the hazard is rot

culture, or its
failure to adapt, obviously the pressing immediate task is for
the society to be sufficiently self—awareto recognize the threat
of accumulating cultural weaknessesand try to correct them,
and so stabilizeits complex cultural network. Vicious spirals

DARK AGE PATTERNS / 175

have their opposites: beneficent spirals, processesin which
each improvement and strengthening leads to other improve—
mentsandstrengtheningsin the culture, in turn further strength—
eningtheinitial improvement.Excellenteducationstrengthens
excellentteachingand researchby someof thoseeducated,
activitiesthat in their turn strengthencommunities.Respon—
sive and responsible government encourages the corrective
practicesexerted by democracy,which in their turn strengthen
good government and responsible citizenship. And so it goes.
Beneficent spirals, operating by benign feedback, mean that
everything needful
is not required at once: each individual
improvement

is benencial for the whole.

Ironically, societies (including our own) that were great
cultural winners in the past are in special peril of
failing to
adapt successfullyin the face of new realities. This is because
follows that nothing
nothing succeeds like success,and it
hangson pastits prime like pastsuccess.Formerly vigorous
cultures typically fall prey to the arrogant self—deceptionfor
which the Greeks had aword, hubris,that we still use.Because
a culture is all of a piece, tolerance of commercial false ac—
counting for gaining profit hasmilitary equivalents in innated
reportsof enemy casualties,along with wishful intelligence
about disaffection in enemy ranks. These falsities merely feed
hubris; the enemyis a “public” that knows quickly whether
wartime false accounting and wishful
intelligence are empty
bragging.The Bayof Pigsfiascoin Cubaandfalsebodycounts
in the Vietnam War demonstrated an American proclivity for
self—deception.Worse,the incentivesfor deception—success
at sycophancy and pursuit of specious careerism—imply
civilian cultural expectationsthat are shamefulwhether or
not they infect military capability.

r76 / DARK AGE AHEAD

History has repeatedly demonstrated that empires seldom
seemto retain sufficient cultural self—awarenessto prevent them
from overreaching and overgrasping. They have neglected to
recognize that the true power of a successfulculture residesin
its example. This is a patient and grown—upattitude to take.
To take it successfully,a society must be self—aware.Any cul—
ture that jettisons the values that have given it competence,
adaptability, and identity becomesweak and hollow. A culture
can avoid that hazard only by tenaciously retaining the un—
derlying valuesresponsiblefor the culture’snature and suc—
cess.That
is a framework into which adaptations must be
assimilated. In the caseof American culture, and other cul—
tures it has profoundly innuenced, such as Canada’s,I know
no better expressionof its corevaluesthan the wordsvoiced
by Lincoln: “that governmentof the people,by the people,
and for the people shall not perish from the earth.” The many
indispensable minutiae for expressing and safeguarding that
core were added into the culture over centuries; aslong as
they are not lost to practice and memory, the possibility re—
mains that they can be augmented for centuries to come.

NOTES

AND

COMMENTS

I. THE HAZARD

Stewart Brand, in TheClock OftheLongNow (New York: Basic
Books, 1999), points out
the fragility of preserved knowl—
edge, including that on computer disks and tapes, which are
increasinglyrelied on to preservenewspapers,letters,books,
andmicronlm.Seekinga strategyto preserveinformation for
thousands of years, he argues that this can only be done by
teaching information curators to renew the physical carriers
of
in other
words, it hasto be done by generations of human beings cul—
turally instructed to fulfill

before their extinction

this purpose.

information

is threatened;

Henri Pirenne (1862—1935),with his pathbreaking books on
the early economic, political, and social development of
the

Notes and comments follow sequencedchapter texts.

178 / NOTES AND COMMENTS

cities of medieval western Europe, laid the foundations for
modern understanding of cities. He recognized cities as the
engines of economic life and explained why they are. In his
MedievalCities (Princeton: Princeton University Press,1925;
paperback edition, New York: Doubleday/Anchor, 1956), he
correlatesthe deepening poverty of Europe through the tenth
century with atrophy of city trade in the Mediterranean world
(owingto Christianprohibitionsagainsttradingwith infidels),
and the revival of western and northern Europe with revival
of
intercity trade and, indirectly through Venice, trade with
the more advancedMiddle East and Asia.

An obtuse foreword by Lewis Mumford to a Princeton pa—
perbackedition criticizesPirennefor his emphasison citiesas
economicentities.This is of historicalinterestin showinghow
far in advanceof the conventional thinking of his day Pirenne’s
work was, and indeed how far in advanceit still is nom popu—
lar and political—and much academic—understandingof
cities, trade, and economic development. Foreign—aiddonors
and recipientsof our time would do well to take to heart
Pirenne’slessonson the processesof economic revival and de—
velopment. His is a basictext for understandinghow the
world’seconomicnetworksoperateandhow they fail.

The History of French Civilization by Georges Duby and
Robert Mandrou
(Paris: Max Leclerc, 1958; English edition,
translated by James Blakely Atkinson, New York: Random
House, 1964) takes asits point of departure the nadir in Eu—
rope’s postclassicalfortunes. The quotation citing the misery
of early—eleventh—centurypeasantry (a category that included
mostEuropeansof the time) is takenfrom p. 7. The first 110
pages explain lucidly how the mundane effects of
the slow
economic revival shaped feudal France and its institutions,

NOTES AND COMMENTS / 179

andthen alsobeganshapingthe Old Regime, which waster—
minated some eight centuries later by the French Revolution.
In thosepagesan alert readercanalsonndvery earlyintima—
tions of French cultural characteristics that are signincant to
this day.The remainder of the book is worth pondering,
too,
especially by those interested in French literature and art and
the formation of culture generally.

The estimate of
twenty million deaths of North American
aboriginals as a consequenceof European invasions and con—
questsis taken from JaredDiamond’s Gum, GermsandSteel:The
Fates of Human Societies(New York, Norton,
1997; paperback,
1999). Diamond estimatesthat 90 percent of the deathswere
from imported diseases,especiallysmallpox.Measlesandwhoop—
ing cough,which wererelativelyinnocuousto childrenof Eu—
ropean descent,wreaked havoc among aboriginal children well
into thetwentiethcentury Diamondisfascinatingon differen—
tial group resistancesto two great classesof infectious diseases:
(a) those endemic in nomadic and other scanty human popu—
lations;and(b) thoseepidemicin densepopulations.

I have learned yet again (this has been going on all my life)
what folly it is to take anything for granted without examin—
ing it skepticallyWhen I wrote on p. 11 about the Ainu, I
sharedthe assumption of physical anthropologists that because
Ainu havelight skinsand Europeanfacial and skull features
and patterns of body hair, they were migrants to Japan from
Europe.A mistake.There must obviouslyhavebeen a time
when anatomically modern human beingswere generalized—
that is, still too new asa speciesto havedistinctivefamily re—
semblancesassociatedwith specific places.The Ainu represent
“preracial” human beings. So we are told by Steve Olson,

18o / NOTES AND COMMENTS

author of MappingHumanHistory:DiscoveringthePastThrough
Our Genes(Boston: Houghton Mifnin, 2002).

The originalaboriginals of Japanare known to paleoanthro—
pologists asJomonese.They reached what is now Japanmore
than ten thousand years ago, lacked “Oriental”
facial features
and body types, and were apparently the first people to invent
pottery. Olson saystheir fossilsindicate that they “represented
anearlymigration of people” north from Australiaandsouth—
easternAsia, en route from EastAfrica. The Jomoneselive on
in modernJapanesepeople,contributing a major component
to the Japanesegene pool. They also appearto have been an—
cestorsof the Ainu. The other major contributorsto Japanese
heredityweretheYayoi,ricefarmers,metalworkers,andweavers
who invadedabout300B.C.E.from Chinaor Korea,havingde—
veloped what we now think of asAsian featuresin the mean—
time. The Yayoi pushed the Ainu north.

Wilfred Thesiger, the author of The Marsh Arabs (New York:
Penguin Books, 1967), lived asa doctor among thesepeople for
eight years.His marvelousdescription of their extraordinaryway
of life andtheiruniquepartof theworld wasreissuedin 1985by
HarperCollins, in hardcover,with beautiful color photographs.

Photographs by Nik Wheeler

the fabulous reed beds were burned,

taken in 1974 were pub—
lished in TheNew YorkTimes,January 26, 2003. The Timesre—
ported that in 1992,
the
lagoonswerepoisoned,andfugitivehumanbeingswererounded
up and executed. This was a sequel to a Shiite Muslim rebel—
lion againstSaddamHusseinat the endof the First Gulf War.
The marshes have not become a battleground (so far) after
the Second Gulf War, but by that point
the Marsh Arabs had
“virtually ceasedto exist,” the Timesreported.The northern
approach to the southern city of Basra,where British troops

NOTES AND COMMENTS / 181

battled to secure the city, is a site—now desert—of some of
the former wetlands.

KarenArmstrong’sIslam:A ShortHistory(New York: Mod—
ern Library, 2000) combines religious, military, political, eco—
nomic, and social history with analysis.

The remark by the nfteenth—century Chinese war ofncial
about the worthlessnessof China’soceantrading appearsin
Anthony Pagden’sPeoplesandEmpires:A ShortHistory ofEuro-
peanMigration,Exploration,andConquest,from GreecetothePres-
ent (New York: Modern Library, 2001). Pagden saysthat “no
one really knows” why the Chinese halted ocean voyaging.
Important consequences do not necessarily have important
causesor widely known motives—especiallywhen decisions
aremadeby smalleliteswho chooseto be secretive.

The old Fort Yukon trapper’sremarkswere an oral commu—
nication, which I have quoted from memory.

For a discussion of the part played by feedback in correcting
instability and restoring operating equilibrium, seeChapter 5,
“Evading Collapse,” in my book The Nature of Economies
(New York and Toronto: Modern Library and Random House
of Canada, 2000; paperback
and New
York: Vintage Canada and Vintage, 2001).

editions,

Toronto

The bizarre half century of rapidly acclaimed and murdered
Roman emperors was brought
to an end by Diocletian, a
tough old soldier of peasantstock from what is now the Dal—
matiancoastof Croatia.He held on to his exaltedjob, andhis
life, by promisingin advanceof his acclamationthathe would
abdicate voluntarily after twenty years. He kept his promise

182 / NOTES AND COMMENTS

but was unable to use the time to stem Rome’s economic and
military chaos.Indeed, his extravagant and radical reorganiza—
tions and reforms, although well—meant,probably hastened
the terminal collapse.

Rome neverdid clarify for itself how an emperorshould
be chosen or removed. It was scornful of kings and dynasties,
having disposed of
royal Etruscan rule early in its history
when it was a small,weak city—state.Its emperors,starting
with Augustus, clung to fictional republican titles, while also
being worshipped asgods. Moses Hadas, a modern American
historian of the classicaland ancient world, commented dryly
that “the anomaly of an autocrat who pretended to be a re—
publican magistrate entailed serious awkwardnessesin deter—
mining the succession.” Hadas, A History of Romefrom Its
Origins to 529 A.D. as Toldby theRomanHistorians (New York:
Doubleday/ Anchor, 1956).

The unlocked security I observed in Japan in 1972 included
shops—often with valuable contents—left unlocked while
proprietors were absent for lunch or whatever, leaving cus—
tomers free to browse without attendants; luggage left unat—
tendedwhile ownerswanderedaway;andmanyvaluableitems
such as cameras,radios, and shopping bagsfilled with newly
purchasedclothing left unwatched,alongwith shoes,outside
temples and shrines. I suspectthat last custom may have been
the genesisof thispervasivesenseof securityagainsttheft.

2. FAMILIES

RIGGED

TO FAIL

My discussionof the sharpmismatchin medianincomesand
median houseprices was published in SaturdayNight (To—
ronto, May 1984), excerpted from Cities and the WealthofNa-

NOTES AND COMMENTS /

r83

tions: Principlesof EconomicLyfe(New York and Toronto: Ran—
dom House, 1984). The objection quoted was by Michael A.
Walker, director of the Fraser Institute of Vancouver; it was
publishedin SaturdayNight (August1984).

“Housing Resalesin 2002SetU.S.Record,” ErontoStar,Jan.
in Food Bank
28, 2003;
Use,” Toronto Star, Dec. 30, 2002;
“Home Ownership Rates
Soar,” Ybronto Star, Jan. 23, 2003.

“Rents Blamed for 4—Year High

Information on the nnancial situations of
food bank users is
from surveys conducted by the Daily Bread Food Bank,
in
Toronto, and the North York HarvestFood Bank, supplemented
by statisticsfrom Made-in-Ontario Housing Crisis by Michael
Shapcott (Ottawa: Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives,
2001); TheGrowingSeason(A Report for the City of Toronto by
the Food and Hunger Action Committee; Toronto, 2001); 7?)-
rontoCAM VacancyRatesandRents[1995—2001](Ottawa: Canada
MortgageandHousing Corporation,2002); Where’sHome?A
Picture of Housing in Ontario (Toronto: Ontario Non—Pront
Housing Association, May 1999; updates, Nov. 1999, 2000,
2001); TakingResponsibilityforHomelessness:An Action Planfor
Toronto(The Golden Report
for the Mayor’s HomelessAction
TaskForce; Toronto, 2001); DepressingWages:Why WelfareCuts
Hurt Both the Welfareand VVorleingPoor(Ottawa: Canadian Cen—
tre for Policy Alternatives, 2001); Ontario VVorles:Making VVel—
fare Worle(Toronto: Government of Ontario, 1998); Report
Card onChildren, a report for the City of Toronto on children
living in poverty (Toronto, 2003).

There is no end of statistics on the current mismatches
between averagehousing costs and averageincomes in vari—
ous U.S. and Canadian cities. They are universally horrifying.

184 / NOTES AND COMMENTS

In 1993the governmentof Canadahalted its contributions
to municipalities for assistedand nonpront housing. In 1998
the governmentof Ontario removedlimits on rent increases
imposedwhen a dwelling unit is vacated;the resulthasbeen
increased evictions. Twenty—two percent of
food bank users
were either evicted or threatened with eviction in 2001, up
from 16 percent in 1998, while averagerents rose at twice the
rate of innation in the sameperiod. The TorontoStar(Nov.
16, 2002) reported that 4,600 people were sleeping in shelters
them were children
for the homeless;eight hundred of
(probably meaning under the age of eighteen).

The Canadian Automobile Association reported in January
2003 that “it cost the averageCanadian motorist $9,525” to
maintain and operate a car in 2002, an increase of $21,056over
2001. The estimateswere basedon driving 18,000 kilometers
a year in a Chevrolet Cavalier four—doorsedan.Insurancenrms
attribute rises in insurance premiums to increasedpayouts for
accident claims and thefts. In the United States,where insur—
ance premiums of all kinds have skyrocketed, shocking car
owners,critics of the insuranceindustry maintainthat rising
premiumsareowing lessto claimsthan to insurancecompa—
nies’ poor returns on their investments, especially bonds. The
New York Times (June 15, 2003) analyzed “impaired invest—
ment assets”of twenty major insurance corporations, indicat—
ing that reportedlosseson airline,telecommunications,utility,
and energy bonds “may have alreadyled insurers to raisepre—
lossesnot yet taken aschargesagainstearnings may
miums
lead to more.” Downgrading by credit agenciesincreasesnrms’
borrowing costs,so “an insurer may then be tempted to raise
for insurers
premiums,” creating “a kind of avalancheefect

. . .

. . .

NOTES AND COMMENTS / 185

andultimatelyfor consumers.”The car—dependentpoor are,of
course,the consumerswho suffermost asremote failuresin the
economy at large buffet and bruise them.

“Sleep plus Speed: A Highway Deathtrap,” according to a
New YorkTimesarticle in the InternationalHemld Tribune(Nov.
28, 2002), reporting on a conference about drowsy drivers
held in Washingtonat the U.S. National Academy of Sci—
ences.The problem hasbecome sufficiently serious for com—
panies to have produced more than a hundred devices, most
of them electronic, to wake up sleeping car and truck drivers.
None seems to be surenre; devices to catch drivers when
their headsnod, for example,fail becausedriversunwittingly
soon learn to nap without nodding. The most elaborate de—
vice described has been developed by IBM.
It shoots ajet of
cold water at sleepy drivers, rolls down windows, sounds an
tells jokes, delivers shock an—
alarm, switches radio stations,
nouncements, and monitors drivers’ replies to questions for
speedandclarity of responses.The companyhopesto make
the device standard equipment in new carswithin nve years.
James Hall, a former member of
the U.S. National Trans—
portation SafetyBoard, saysthe reasonswhy drowsydriving
is on the rise include long commutes, the need to work sev—
eral jobs to support families, an aging society, medications,
sleep disorders, andjet lag.

Blandishments to gamble by governments that have become
addicted to revenue from casinos, slot machines, and video
lottery terminals are effective.StatisticsCanadareports that
the averageannual amount spent by Canadian adults on gam—
bling rose from $130 in 1992 to $424 in 2000. The averagein

186 / NOTES AND COMMENTS

Ontario was$348,where men living alonespentan average
of $1,120 on gambling in 2000; women living alone spent
$450, but “women have been growing as a percentage of
people gambling in the last ten years,” said the director of the
Ontario government’s Responsible Gambling Council. A Sta—
tisticsCanadaanalystsaysthat the nguresareprobablythe tip
of
the iceberg, because people “tend to underreport how
much they spendon gambling.” The data were basedon
about thirty thousand households.

Much hasbeenwritten about the GeneralMotors campaignthat
replaced146 electric—poweredmasstransit systemswith General
Motors gasoline—poweredbuses.I have drawn chieny on “Re—
visitingtheAmericanStreetcarScandal”by Al Mankoff,whose
account,written duringhisretirementafterafifty—yearcareerin
transportation, seemsthe most reliable (Newjersey Fansportation
PlanningAuthority,Inc, and in Transition;www.njtpa.org/public_
affairs/readingroom/trolley.htm). For FBI documents recently
obtainedundertheFreedomof InformationAct concerningthe
bribing of public officialsby the GM consortium,seewww.
njtpa.org/public_anhirs/ intrans/scandalhtm.

The best—knownessayon theseeventsisby BradfordSnell,
who in 1974 was a young lawyer for US. Senateinvestigators
and subsequently for the antitrust division of
the US. De—
partment of Justice. Snell gives a broad and basically true ac—
count, but he slipped up on some details and these have been
seizedon by defenders of General Motors to discredit his re—
port. (The Industrial Reorganization Act: Hearings before
the Subcommitteeon Antitrust andMonopoly of the Com—
mittee on the Judiciary, US. Senate; Part 3, Ground Trans—
portation Industries, 93rd Cong., 2nd sess.,1974.)

Snell’s critics also maintain that the electric trolleys would

NOTES AND COMMENTS / 187

soon havebeen replacedby dieselbusesin any case,and asearly
as1915 were under threat nom unauthorized touring carsand
small buses called jitneys (“jitney” was slang for nve cents),
which, with nexible routes, low fares,and supplemental rush—
hour servicepoached streetcarpassengers.So they did, but this
is evidence lessthat electric transit was dying than that a niche
had opened for small transit vehicles—something between a
streetcarand a taxi—with nexible routes. The niche still isn’t
nlled in the United Statesor Canada, although elsewhere (in
the Friesiandistrict of the Netherlandsandin much of the Carib—
bean, for example) jitney—type vehicles nll the niche nicely.
Jitneys were systematicallyput out of businessby municipali—
ties, with the cooperation—to their shame—of electric transit
systems,to protect their own monopolistic franchises.

The nrstjitneysin theUnited Statesemergedin LosAngeles
in 1914.Before licensedjitneys were hounded out of existence,
their numbershad explodedin Americancitiesfrom coastto
coast, reaching a peak of about 62,000 in 1915. In New York,
smallentrepreneurs—nequently,immigrantsnom the Carib—
bean—havesincemaderepeatedattemptsto reintroducejitney
services.These, too, havebeen hounded but havebeen hard to
squelchdecisively,so badly are such servicesneeded.Currently
licensed “dollar vans,” for which the fare is actually $1.50, are
being legally permitted to supplyjitney servicesin some outer
areasof the city. They meet passengersat subwaystationsor ter—
minals. This uncharacteristic government tolerance of jitneys
wasthe resultof a strike by privately owned buslines, with nxed
routes, that had servedtheseareas.The strike was causedby re—
duction in bus income when passengerstransferring from sub—
way to bus were no longer required to pay bus fares.The new
transferpolicy had been occasionedby vociferouspublic protests
against“double fares.” The van fareshave not arousedsimilar

188 / NOTES AND COMMENTS

protest, apparently becausethe jitney service is so nexible and
therefore speedy.As usual, everything that happens connects
information from a good friend with
with much else. (Oral
wide acquaintanceamong van entrepreneurs.)

Mankoff

tells of the part played by E.]ay Quinby, the naval
officer in Florida who tried to warn municipalities that they
were being swindled, and the attemptsto discredit him because
heprinted hispamphletson cheappaperandpreparedthem in
a furnace—basementworkshop. Quinby was a maverick who
had shockedhis wealthy parentsby taking a blue—collarjobop—
erating an intersuburban trolley out of Paterson,New Jersey.
Mankoff took thousandsof photographs of streetcarsin New
York, New Jersey,andPennsylvania.More than four hundred
of these can be seenat wwwalmankoEcom/.

The advertisements stigmatizing users of public transit as
“creeps and weirdos,”
associated with “wet dog smell,” and
touting General Motors passengercars, appearedin the Van—
couver weekly paper GeorgiaStraight of March 13—20and
March 27—April 3, 2003.

The number of prison andjail
inmatesin the United States
reachedtwo million in 1999,up from fewerthan 500,000in
1980, according to TheNew York Times(Sept. 29, 2002). This
is saidto be the highest rate of incarceration in the world, and
to cost some $55,000 per inmate per year.

Generating an economic operation worth $110 billion per
year is an impressive feat for criminals, misfits, and unfortu—
nates.The costsof running a prison—money spentlargely
for prison guards and other staff—are valued sources of
in—
come in the poor, backwatercommunitieswhere largenew
prisons are generallylocated. Nowadaysmost US. prisons
run by private companies have eliminated costly rehabilita—

NOTES AND COMMENTS / 189

tion efforts as“useless”—not true, according to recent meta—
analyses,depending on the type of crime (Rodger Doyle,
“Reducing Crime, Rehabilitation Is Making a Comeback,”
ScientincAmerican,May 2003, p. 33A [the magazine’sdepart—
ment called “By the Numbers”]).

the companies responsible for

Ontario, which hasbegun privatizing prisons, promised to
them. However, a
monitor
Utah—basedcompany, Management and Training Corpora—
tion Canada,was found to haveviolated the province’s human
rights codein a superjailfor fourteenmonthsbeforethe vio—
lation (prisoners were forced to wear a racial badge) was no—
ticed by the province. According to the TorontoStar, which
spotted the violation and which has investigated the practices
of private jail companies in the United States,privatization
has not proved cheaper, safer,or more efficient than govern—
ment management. In the Ontario superjail referred to, safety
concerns were raisedafter a 50 percent reduction was made in
overnight guards, but the concerns were dismissed.A week
later, a hundred inmates tried to escape,and since then half
the inmateshavebeenkept on a “partial lockdown” regimen.
Privately run jails are a mark of American “reinvented gov—
that has been picked up by neoconservatives in
ernment”
Canada. They are an extreme example of what
I analyze as
monstrousmoral hybridsin my book SystemsofSurvival:The
Moral Foundationsof Commerceand Politics (New York and
Toronto: Random House, 1991; Vintage, 1994).

3. CREDENTIALING

VERSUS EDUCATING

The WashingtonPostsurvey of computer—sciencestudent en—
rollment was published in the InternationalHerald Tribuneof
August 28, 2002.

190 / NOTES AND COMMENTS

“College Degree Worth Millions, Survey Finds” was an As—
sociatedPressreport nom Washington, published in the 7670mm
Star,July 18, 2002.

The panelist/ essayistcommenting on educational funding and
the attitude it revealed was Carol Goar, an editorial writer
and columnist

for the 'Ibronto Star.

Robert Gordon,

John Tibbits, the president of Conestoga Community College,
is the advocatefor the four—yeardegree quoted in “Elite Level
of Colleges Proposed in Ontario,” Emma Star,July 22, 2002.
the president of Humber College, said,
“We’re trying to suggest. . .
the designation of some institu—
tions should be changed but making it very clear the idea is
not to become a lousy university.” The article implies that
President Tibbits
is envious of Guelph, Waterloo, and Wil—
fred Laurier universities, which are near his college. President
Gordon would like to see the province’s twenty—two com—
munity collegesbecomeeligible (if they meet requirements
applying to four—yeardegrees)to call themselves Institutes of
Technologyand Applied Learning; others are suspiciousof
this asa “marketing gimmick.” Thyagi DeLanerolle, the eX—
ecutive director of
that a change to “elite status” will “dennitely compromise ac—
cess. . . one of
the founding principles of community col—
leges.”TibbetsandGordonrepliedthat the new status“offers
another place for college diploma holders to go when uni—
versities won’t give them credit.”

the College Student Alliance, predicted

In May 2003, newspaperadvertisementsfor LoyalistCol—

lege of Applied Arts and Technology in Belleville, Ontario,
invited holdersof diplomasto “Join the excitement!” asit an—
nounced a new four—yearbachelor’sdegree preparing “leaders

NOTES AND COMMENTS / 191

for the Human Services Professions.” It will be interesting to
seewhether the degree becomes a required credential, and if
so, for what.

“Undergrad Tuition Feesup 135% over 11 Years” is from the
YbrontoStar (Aug. 22, 2002); the information came from a
StatisticsCanada report issuedthe previous day.

The chief of Bausch 81Lomb wasRonald L. Zarella. The man
who perpetuatedhisinsecuritywasJackGrubman,astockan—
alystwho lost hisjob. His former employer donated $1 million
to the exclusive nursery school where Grubman had applied
for acceptanceof his daughter,causinganotheruproar.

For an explanation of why sporadic military production or
newly introduced heavy military production can produce mil—
itary booms(ashappenedin North America,endingthe De—
pressionof the 1930s),but why prolonged military production
lacks this power, seeChapter 12, “Transactions of Decline,” in
my book Citiesand the WealthofNations (cited above).

The Virgil quotation with referenceto Augustusis in Hadas
(cited above).

Rome decisivelydefeatedCarthageandits brilliant generalHan—
nibal at the battleof Zamain 202 B.C.E.,aftersixteenyearsof
war.By terms of the treaty,Carthage,which waslocatedin what
is now Tunisia,wasforbidden to wagewar without Roman per—
mission. However, Carthage’s trade recovered sufficiently to
alarm the senator Cato, who concluded his speeches, no matter
on what subject, with “Carthage must be destroyed.” In 149
B.C.E.,Rome laid siege to the city When the Carthaginians

192 / NOTES AND COMMENTS

refusedto abandon it and insteadmanned their walls with im—
provised weapons, the Romans accusedthem of breaking the
treaty! The siegelastedthree years.Here is what happenednext,
asdescribedby the historian Appian (175—100B.C.E.),acivil ser—
vant of Egyptian origin, loyal to the Romans:

. . .

. .

The men . . .

. . .

. . .

After penetrating into the city, Scipio [the Roman general]
three streetsbetween the mar—
turned his attention to . . .
ket and the citadel
lined on both sideswith six—story
housesfrom which the Romans were pelted.
.While
one battle wasin progresson the roofs another wasfought
against all comers in the narrow street below.
Some
. . .
were killed out of hand, some nung down alive
. . . to the
these some were caught on upright
pavement, and of
spears,sabersor swords.
[W]hen Scipio reached the
. . . streetswere set anre. [Romans were
citadel the three
ordered] to level a path through the debris asthe houses
burned.
overthrew the buildings in a
mass.Crashesgrew louder and along with stones many
corpsespitched to the ground
. . . someliving bodies too,
mostly of old men, children and women who had hidden
in the inmost crannies of the houses; some were lacerated,
some half burned, and all uttered distressing cries.
. ..
Others, nung down.
along with timbers, stones and
burning brands, were broken and mangled and crushed
into unnatural shapes.
[Soldiers, assigned]to remove
the debris with axes, crowbars and boathooks and smooth
a way for the infantry, shovedthe dead and those still liv—
ing into holes in the ground, using their weapons and
turning bodieslike blocks. Human beingswere fill for gul—
lies.

Their legs, protruding from the ground, writhed

. .

. . .

. . .

NOTES AND COMMENTS / 193

the trumpets,

for a considerable while. Some fell feet down, and their
. . .
facesand skullswere trampled by the galloping horses,not
through the riders’ designbut becauseof haste.
There
wasthe tension of battle, the expectation of quick victory,
the excitement of the soldiery, the shouts of the criers and
blasts of
all of
which created a kind of madnessand an indifference to
what their eyessaw Six dayswere spent on this effort.
. . .
The city which had nourished for seven hundred
years. . . was now being utterly blotted out. . .
.As Scipio
looked on he is saidto havewept openly
for along while
he remainedsunk in thought. [From Hadas,(cited above)]

the commands of officers

. . .

. . .

. . .

The Carthaginianswere a Phoenicianpeople,greatnavi—

gators, explorers, and traders of
the ancient classicalworld.
Phoenicians were the creators of our alphabet, which we
mistakenly call Roman.

I draw on personalmemory of Eisenhower’sspeechon the
Interstate Highway Program.

“Premier Says He Won’t Back Kyoto if Economy Jeopar—
dized,” Toronto Star, September 7, 2002. The Bronto Star of
January 21, 2003, reported that the president of General Mo—
tors of Canada, Michael Grimaldi,
production and salesof his company’s sports utility vehicles
and pickup trucks from Canada if
the Canadian government
pressesproposalsfor fuel economy. “[I]f you compromise the
functionality,is the product competitivein the marketor is it
better not to offer it? . . .We offer a lot of largevehiclesas
well assmall vehicles.”

threatened to withdraw

194 / NOTES AND COMMENTS

with the product portfolio,

Grimaldi said the industry has told the government that it
can’t reach the goal of 25 percent improvement in fuel econ—
omy for new cars and trucks by 2010. “It’s an admirable goal
but.
the technology, the cost
and price issues,we don’t seea way to get there.” General Mo—
tors is Canada’sbiggest auto assemblerand retailer and one of
the country’s largest employers. It exports about 90 percent of
its output to the United States,accordingto Grimaldi.

. .

Margaret Atwood,
(Toronto), March 28, 2003.

“A Letter to America,” The GlobeandMail

The idea of the multiversity was popularized in the 19505by
Dr. Clark Kerr, presidentof the University of California at
Berkeley,but by 1964 he was having secondthoughts; he
complained that professorswere shunting aside the interests
of the university in favor of too many activitiesfor which
they obtained funding elsewhere.People making big changes
needto heedfeedback—inthis case,that studentswerebeing
neglectedin favor of taskstaken on by the multiversity.Dr.
Kerr blamed professorsand external funding agencies,and let
himself off scot—freefor changes in institutions of higher
learning that he had persuasivelyadvocatedbefore they inter—
fered with his own administrative interests. For a fuller ac—
count of Dr. Kerr’s remarks and thinking, see pp. 73—74in
the chapter titled “How New Work Begins” in my book The
Economyof Cities (New York and Toronto: Random House,
1969; Vintage, 1970).

The president of Carleton University in Ottawa haspointed
in an interview published in the Eronto Star (Jan. 23,
out,
2003),

that

NOTES AND COMMENTS / 195

parents shouldn’t expect their children will get the same
quality of education they or their older children got. Since
the 1990’s, the ratio of students to faculty has risen from 16
to 1, to 22 to 1. If you askstudentswhat matters most to
them, they saycontactwith faculty It’s easyto saywe’ll have
placesfor all thosestudents.It’snot possiblefor usto saythe
educationexperiencethey will receivewill be the same.

Other cultureshavefallen victim in the pastto disconnection
betweencredentialsand education.American and European
scholarswho observed the disconnection in nineteenth—
century China gave it
the name of mandarinismand deni—
gratedit asstultifying.

4.. SCIENCE

ABANDONED

Thomas Kuhn’s book is The Structureof ScientincRevolutions
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press,1996).

The destructive plans for Washington Squarewere conceived
andpromotedby Robert Mosesandhis favorite engineering
firms. The traffic commissioner at the time of the battle over
closing of
the carriage road through the square was T. T.
Wiley. His successor,Henry Barnes,coined the word “grid—
lock,” predicting a day when New York would be totally par—
alyzed by cars blocking intersections. While this has not
literally happened, gridlock is routinely predicted asthe ap—
proaching logical conclusion to all traffic jams. Barnes won
his reputation first by arranging Denver’s traffic lights to halt
all vehiclessimultaneouslyat intersections,leavingpedestri—
ansneeto crossasthey wished,until the lights changed.He
was obsessedwith the menacesof grid intersections.

196 / NOTES AND COMMENTS

A yearafterimpatientdriversweretamedby a changein street
direction,
traffic humps were added to most streets in our
Toronto neighborhood.At leastin the caseof my block, this
may have been gilding the lily. It would have been interesting
to have neighborhood traffic and speedmeasurementsbefore
the street—directionchange,after the change,and after the
humps. One traffic—calmingtechnique is not necessaryfor all.

I distributed numerous photocopies of the complete clipping
nom Chemical8EngineeringNews.Optimistically, I thought the
information would be enlightening, especially to power bro—
kersandplanning staffconcernedwith plansfor the Toronto
waterfront, but it seemednot to elicit an iota of interest, eX—
cept from the city’s director of planning, PaulBedford.Mr.
Bedford told me that although he recognized that the ele—
vated expresswaycould come down—with benefit to traffic
movement—thiswould arousesuch opposition from trafnc
experts in his own department that it would not be practical
for him to recommend it.

A monographby EdwardR. Tufte, VisualExplanations:Images
andQuantities,EvidenceandNarrative(Cheshire, Conn: Graph—
ics Press, 1997), describes Dr. Snow’s analysis of evidence in
the caseof the 1854London choleraepidemic.The title of
Dr. Tufte’s paper refers to the importance of the graphics that
revealed the data Dr. Snow used:

By creating statisticalgraphics that revealedthe data, Dr.
Snow was able to discoverthe causeof the epidemic and
bring it to an end. In contrast,by fooling around with dis—
playsthat obscuredthe data,those who decided to launch
the Challenger spaceshuttle got it wrong, terribly wrong.

NOTES AND COMMENTS / 197

For both cases,the consequencesresulteddirectly from the
quality [Tufte’s italics] of
the methods used in displaying
and assessingquantitative evidence.

The point Tufte makes goes deeper than the fact that dis—
playsof datareveala scientist’sacuity of thought abouthis or
her data. Graphic treatment
instruct
or befuddle scientists.

can also, in itself, either

findings are set forth, with sup—
Eric Klinenberg’s important
plementing tables and photographs, in Heat VVaue:A Social
AutopsyofDisasterin Chicago(Chicago:University of Chicago
Press,2002). Included aresadexamplesof dead—endedattempts
in North Lawndale at community betterment, doomed like
thosereferredto on p. 37.

The population of low—densityNorth Lawndale, which left

for the suburbs,waspredominantlyJewish;it wasthinly re—
placed by African Americans; the population of high—density
South Lawndale, which stayedput, was predominantly His—
panic, augmented heavily by more Hispanic immigration. The
late SaulAlinsky tried hard to persuaderesidentsandlargebusi—
to abandon North Lawndale in the 1960s, with little
nessesnot
understanding or help from City officials or planning staff and
none from Chicago employers (personalcommunications).

Statistics on mysterious Canadian job creation in 2002, and
I have quoted, come nom the business
the mystified comment
and financial pagesof the TorontoStar.

For a description of why and how city import
curs, and why it is sporadic, see Chapter 5, “Explosive City
Growth,” in my book TheEconomyof Cities (cited above).For

replacing oc—

198 / NOTES AND COMMENTS

a diagram showing graphically why a given quantity of eco—
nomic expansion achieved by import
replacement exerts a
much more powerful force for economic developmentand
expansion than does expansion of exports, seethe appendix
that follows the text in that book.

Fortheeffectof theprocesson acity’sownregionandthedif—
fering effectson more distant regions, seeChapters 3 to 10, in—
clusive,in my book Citiesandthe I/VealthofNations(cited above).
For a discussionof why the processis a basic form of eco—
nomic self—maintenance,seeChapter 4, “The Nature of Self—
Refueling,” in my book TheNature ofEconomies(cited above).

The built—inunsuitability of suburbansprawl for efficient
transit systemswas researched and well analyzed by Francis
Bello in The ExplodingMetropolis(New York: Doubleday,
1958). He concluded that “there seemsno way to provide an
efficient mass—transitsystem that can move people from low—
density housing.” He did not deal with the potential “jitney”
option (seenote, p. 187.)

replacing has diminished al—
My guessesat why city import
most to the vanishing point
in the United States are these:
(a) products all over America have become so standardized
that there is no longer much grist for the process;and (b) Amer—
ican production is lacking—an even more serious handicap
than standardizedproduction. Lack of production is papered
over by importations of foreign capital. The US. dencit in bal—
ance of payments (the difference in value between what it ex—
ports andwhat it imports) currently makesthe United States
by far the largest debtor country in the world.

These two symptoms—extreme standardization of prod—
ucts and lack of production—which may be related, remind

NOTES AND COMMENTS / 199

one of similar extreme economic weaknessesevident in Rome
before its collapse. Michael Rostovtzeff,
in A History of the
Ancientl/Vorld,vol. 11,Rome(New York: Oxford University Press,
1927; paperback edition, retitled Rome, New York: Galaxy/
Oxford, 1960), points out that during the “terrible crisis” of
the latter part of the second century 013.,when the wealth of
the empire seemedlimitless, “the people were gradually los—
ing their capacity for work and ingenuity in invention.
. . .
Routine became more and more powerful
in the sphere of
creative production.”

Writing of

the standardization throughout

the empire of
such ordinary items ascrockery and lamps, Rostovtzeff com—
mentson the later empire, “Nothing now exceptarticlesof
luxury, availableto few, finds a distant market.” As production
dwindled and idlenessincreased,the Roman shortfall was pa—
pered over by the tribute that the imperial power wrung from
its satellitesand possessions.

Rostovtzeff emphasizes the decay of Rome as decay of
morale in rulers and ruled, but he confuses causes and effects.
While he describesthe breakdown of Rome’s economy and
its institutions,he developsa circular argument,blaming the
deteriorating victims of
the breakdowns. Rome’s multi—
faceted troubles are so richly documented and so juicy that
everyonesinceGibbon hasbecomemired in their very in—
tractability. A great story; especiallyheard from a safedistance.

DUMBED-DOWN

TAXES

5

.

The Oxford English Dictionary gives, as the first meaning of
farmer, “one who undertakes the collection of taxes,revenues,
etc.” The word comes from medieval French for a fixed fee.
because farmers
It came to mean,

in English, an agriculturist,

zoo / NOTES AND COMMENTS

were subject to paying landlords nxed fees. The charter al—
lowing a city to farm its own taxesmeant that the city could
appoint its own taX collectors, responsible to the city rather
than to the royal treasury, the church, or a regional warlord.
Cities with these powers sometimes undertook what became
major regional or national
improvements. For instance, the
merchants of London, nnancing a campaign against piracy,
laid the foundationsof the Englishnavy.

says, “Some of

Comparing conditions in Toronto’s shelters for the homeless
with standardsapplying to refugee campsin poor countries, a
former United Nations aid worker, Rick Wallace, one of
the
authors of a report on shelters for the Toronto Disaster Re—
lief Committee,
in Toronto
sheltersareworsethan in refugeecampsin Rwanda,in terms
of space,sanitation and preventative health care practices.” A
coauthor, Dr. Stephen Hwang, a worker
for the health re—
search unit at St. Michael’s Hospital, pointed out: “Even a
nice shelteris not a good situationfrom a public healthper—
but over—crowdingandpoor ventilation canonly
spective. . .
make a sub—optimalsituation worse.”

the conditions

The committee’s inspectorsfound that in one Toronto shel—

ter the distancebetween beds (matson the noor) was fourteen
inches,lessthan specifiedin rulesfor campsin Chechnyaor
Kosovo. They alsofound a shelter that had two working sinks
for one hundred residents.There were infestations of lice and
other pests;severalsheltershad poorly trained or abusivestaff;
andfights,theft, andotherviolationswerecommon.Manycity
sheltersarewell run, clean,andsufficientlyspacious,the report
noted,but addedthat on somenightssomeof their guestsmust
stayat terrible shelters,where they can contract diseasesor pick

NOTES AND COMMENTS / 201

up vermin and introduce these to the well—runshelters.The
worst shelterswere not identined in the report becausethe au—
thors, who included two doctors and two nurses, said over—
worked shelterstaff haveno meansto improve conditions.

two million nom 2000. Most of

Sixteenmillion, three hundred thousandtourists visited Toronto
in 2001, a decline of
the de—
cline occurred before the September terrorist attacks on the
World Trade Center and the Pentagon dampened air travel.
Most Toronto visitors arenom the rest of Canadaor from US.
stateson the Canadianborder. The decline continued, reaching
disasterconditions(for hotelsandother businessescateringto
tourists)in April 2003,when the World Health Organization
issueda travel advisory warning people not to visit the city be—
causeof the SARS epidemic.The advisorywaslifted a week
later, when it seemedthat the number of caseswas declining
andthatthe epidemicwasundercontrol,althoughthiswasfol—
lowed by asmallspurt. SARS wasconfined to hospitalsand hos—
pital workers nom the nrst, not spreadingthrough the general
population.The provincehadpreviouslystrippeditshealthsys—
tem of what it considered “redundant” nurses,and of the mi—
crobiologistswho watch for incoming infectionsandprepare
tests for them. Had any emergency arisen—say,an accident
with an unusually high injury toll—the stripped—downhealth
systemwould havebeen inadequateto cope.

The emergencythat happenedto hit was SARS, and al—

though the systemhad been rendered inadequateby provincial
cheeseparing,the system managed to cope, as caregiversand
otherhospitalandpublichealthworkersput in working daysof
twelve hours or more, sevendaysa week, suffering stress,eX—
haustion, and probably lowered resistanceto infection. The

202 / NOTES AND COMMENTS

spin doctors of
the provincial kleptocracy untruthfully im—
plied that the premier and the province’shealth minister had not
been informed how short the hospitals were of nurses, nor
warned that it was imprudent to dismissthe province’snve
leading medical laboratory scientists.To try to redeem them—
selves,the premier andministerwept crocodiletearsoverthe
immense economic lossesto Toronto businessesand workers
and promised to launch a comparatively huge provincial ad—
vertising campaign urging visitors to return to Ontario. As
in the summer of 2003, the tourists arenot yet
this is written,
returning, and citizens are worrying about the ability of hos—
pitals andlaboratoriesto cope with the threat of WestNile
fever when the mosquito seasonstarts.

For unknown reasons,in the summer of 2003 the prairie
provinceof Saskatchewanwasthe mostafnictedby WestNile
fever.Few casesturned up in Ontario, which was the province
most afnicted in 2002.

In the past,the number of jobs in the city and the number of
passengersusing masstransit rose and fell together. However,
startingin 2001, the two statisticspartedcompany.Ridership
slipped while jobs grew The Toronto Transit Commission has
not been able to identify why. Even the vicious spiral of higher
faresandcutsin services,while it may be partly responsible,does
not seemto offer a complete explanation (“TTC Looks for An—
swersto Drop in Rider Levels,” TorontoStar,June 17, 2002).

The missing puzzle piece may be supplied by a TTC re—
port published earlier in June, which pointed out that a radi—
cal change in laying out routes had occurred:

One of the reasonsthat the original subwayswere success—
ful.

. .was that they were built on an already—existingsolid

NOTES AND COMMENTS / 203

. . . streetcarlines.

baseof high—volumeridership which had been established
This strategywasabandonedasTTC’s
by
Spadinaline wasbuilt andotherlinesexpanded.What replaced
the earlierstrategywasan optimistic notion that high—density
developmentandtransitpassengerswould follow.

. . .

The report callsfor a return to the “subways second strategy.”
“It’s not build a subway and riders will come, but build it
when they are already there.”

I am gratined to learn that I’m not alone in being suspicious
of nxed rail routes that lack prior empirical feedback. Gordon
Chong, the chair of GO Transit,a provincial rail commuter
line, previouschair of the GreaterToronto ServicesBoard
(abolishedby the province), and former vice chairman of the
TTC, pointsout thatthesebodies,aswell asTransportCanada
and the U.S. General Accounting Ofnce, are all in agreement
that experimentswith nexibletransitserviceneedto precede
nxed rail lines. “After all, a world—classcity can’t have a lowly
bus solveits problems,” Chong writes sarcastically.“Maybe it’s
time we stoppedbuilding monumentsto our egosandcome
back to earth.” He points out the cost and nexibility advantages
of electric trolleybuses and routes, especially in low—density
areas(Gordon Chong, “It’s Not Sexy,but Lowly Bus Is Effec—
tive,” Emma Star,April 27, 2002).

The grassrootsToronto Arts Council (I am a memberof its
advisory panel) has increased its budget and its fund—raising
efforts to help compensate for loss of grants from the city to
artistsandart groups.

After—schoolcourseswere restoredin responseto a savvycam—
paign by elderly citizens, but tuition fees,which had previously

204 / NOTES AND COMMENTS

been$1.75per classhour, were raisedin 2001 to $3.50 per
hour (halvedfor seniors)and by 2003 were $6.40 per hour (for
seniors,$3.20 or $3.75 per hour). Enrollments dropped during
this period nom 300,000 students per year
to 48,000, and
schoolsparticipating from severalhundred to forty In addition,
registration staff was so severelyreduced that only two persons
were available in 2003 to take 30,000 registrations in two weeks,
another discouragement to would—bestudents.

The then mayor of Calgary, Al Duerr, speaking at a meeting
of Canada’sbig—citymayors (the C5), in May 2001, said:

Right now we’re a city in a province [Alberta] that is en—
joying unbelievableprosperity. We’re looking at surpluses
of $8 [billion]
to $10 billion a year in provincial revenues
from petroleum.
. . . I should be standing here and telling
you that we havethe world by the tail, but we don’t. The
bottom line is, Calgary is struggling. Four years ago we
didn’t have a signincanthomelessproblem. This fall we’re
homelesssheltersthat aregoing to house
opening two . . .
over 700 people.We havea huge affordablehousing prob—
lem. We have transportation problems.We alsohaveCal—
gariansenjoying incredible prosperity who are beginning
to wonder what that prosperity is all about.
Calgary
collects about 8 percent of the taxesthat arepaid by Cal—
garianseventhough the city paysfor virtually all of the es—
sentialelementsthat contribute to the quality of life in the
city, other than health care and education.
[M]ore
money and stronger economies is not the solution—that
will not addressthe fundamental imbalance.

. . .

. . .

Recounting some of the city’s history, Duerr said:

NOTES AND COMMENTS / 205

. . .

We were primarily a one—industrytown until 1982 when
This was a difn—
the bottom fell out of the economy. . . .
but in many waysit provided the opportu—
cult period
nity for the rebirth of Calgary.
The downturn caused
us to not only diversify our economy but also to rethink
what it
.We have a
much strongerdowntown, with more residentialunits. . . .
[W]e are discovering all of those dimensions that make a
community. We havea long way to go.

took to make a sustainablecity.

. . .

. .

Summing up, he said:

In spite of
increasedresponsibilities and diminishing re—
sources,municipal politicians acrossthe country havecon—
tinued to deliver good local government. We still have
great cities. We will not have great cities on an inter—
national scaleif we don’t come to gripswith [the imbalance
between cities and other levelsof government] (IdeasThat
Matter,vol. 2, no. 1 [2001]).

One might suppose that Ottawa,

the national capital,
would get a better break from federal members of Parliament
than other cities. Not so, saysClive Doucet, an Ottawa city
councillor.Like Toronto, Ottawais award of the provinceof
Ontario. Doucet writes in The GlobeandMail (Feb.25, 2002):

I’m considereda successfulcouncillor becauseonly one
schoolhasbeen closedin my ward and no community cen—
tre hasbeenshut down. I spendmy time running from “Save
Our School” ralliesto “SaveOur Community Centre” ral—
lies. But I never thought I’d seea “Save Our Street” rally.
What arewe supposedto do—start collecting a partnership

206 / NOTES AND COMMENTS

fund to rebuild the crumbling street,aswe’ve done for the
community centres?It’satrap from which there doesn’tseem
to be any way out exceptto rail againstthe “CanadaProb—
lem.”
Ottawa has more homelesspeople than Vancou—
ver . . .
our affordablehousingstockin decades.

. . .
becausewe haven’taddedmore than a few sticksto

Federalpoliticians,like Mr. Martin, areout of touch even
with the city in which their parliament is situated, much as
Ontario politicians are out of
touch with their capital city,
Toronto.

In the federal budget for 2000, $1.5 billion was committed
to help replace aging medical equipment and reduce waiting
times for diagnostic tests.The provinces were given the money
to spend, and they used it to purchaseicemakers, noor scrub—
bers, lawn mowers, and sewing machines, probably with the
aim of reducing labor costsfor hiring maintenance workers.
The chief executive officer of
the Canadian Association of
Radiologists discoveredwhere the money went by digging up
salesslipsand hospitalreports.In somecases,provincesan—
nounced they were buying diagnostic equipment but never
did so. In Ontario, millions of dollars were given to private—
sector nrms that subsequently closed their clinics. This expose
wasreleasedwhen the federal government announced another
health care grant, in 2003, routed through the provinces. The
Canadian Health Coalition, a public watchdog, warned that
the government was again courting misuse of funds for med—
ical diagnosticequipment.A spokesmanfor the federalhealth
minister assuredthe public that new reporting requirements
will ensureprovincesaremore accountablethis time. If only.
(“Medical Fund Misuse Feared,” Toronto Star, Feb. 28, 2003.)

NOTES AND COMMENTS / 207

for barely half

The Greater Toronto Area caucus of members of the federal
governing party was able to account
the
in the Greater
spending claimed by the federal government
Toronto Area. Alan Tonks, former chair of
the Metro gov—
ernment (predecessorof the amalgamated City of Toronto),
isthe memberof the prime minister’staskforceon theplight
of Canadian cities who could not find information on federal
spendingin Toronto (“Ottawa Can’t Account for GTA Spend—
ing,” TorontoStar,Oct. 8, 2002).

Joe Berridge, a Toronto planner, hasmade a computer searchof
subjectsconsidered in the federal parliament of Canada dur—
ing 2001 andthe nrsthalf of 2002.Foot—and—mouthdisease,
of which there wasn’t a single casein Canada,was mentioned
172 times;homelessnesswasmentionedjust 19 times.Agri—
cultural subsidies came up 162 times, food banks just once.
issues,such as farming and forestry, accounted for 85
Rural
percent of keywords turned up in the search. Grain trans—
portation wasmentioned more than twice asmany times as
the automobile,
industries combined. A Toronto member of Parliament repre—
sentsan averageof 35,000 more people than a rural member,
Mr. Berridge pointed out (“Homelessness, Transit Left Off
Ottawa Agenda,” TorontoStar,June 27, 2002).

technology, high—tech, and biotech

science,

former director of

Richard Gilbert,
the Canadian Urban Insti—
tute and a former Toronto city councillor, now presidentof the
CanadianFederationof Municipalities, suggeststhat, while
it has no
Canada needs local, regional, and national government,
need for provincial government. He favors “natural”
regions,
which in somecasesmaycoincidewith provinces,in othersnot.

208 / NOTES AND COMMENTS

He makesa strong casefor assigningprovincial statusand pow—
ersto Montreal and Toronto, and exploresthe pros and cons of
the ideagainingacceptance.He thinksa chief advantageto the
country asawhole would be a strongurbanvoice—nowlack—
ing—atfederal—provincialconferences,the eventsat which na—
tional policies areactually shapedand accepted(“Make Toronto
the 11th Province,” The Globe and Mail, Nov. 26, 1999).

Seymour Freedgood, writing on municipal government
in
TheExplodingMetropolis(cited above), noted that the US. city
is “the child of
the State.” He said that Chicago’s mayor
Richard Daley “has summed up the consistentlament of most
big—citymayors”:

“I think there’stoo much local money going to the statecap—
italsandWashington.It’sridiculous for usto be sendingthem
money and askingfor it back. I don’t think the citiesshould
haveto go hat in hand when they need the money for im—
provements.We’regoing to haveto clarify the role of the lo—
cality in relationto stateandnationalgovernments.The cities
andmetropolitan areasarethe important areasof the coun—
try today,but they’restill on the low part of the totem pole.”

That was in 1958, and that Mayor Daley was the father of

Chicago’s current Mayor Richard Daley.

For Mayor Bloomberg’s budget battle, seeNew YorleObserver
April 21, 2003, and TheNew YorleTimes,April 20, 2003.

Two recentbooks by rueful foreign—aidinsidersareW Eas—
terly, TheElusiveQuestfor Growth:Economists’Adventuresand
Misadventuresin the Tropirs (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,

NOTES AND COMMENTS / 209

2002), andJosephE. Stiglitz, GlobalizationandIts Discontent:
(New York: Norton,

2002).

Update: Although nothing has been done, or even officially
acknowledged,about the need to reform the provincial—
municipal relationshipsinherited from a century and a half
ago, things are looking up somewhat, thanks to voters. In
October 2003 the wretched Ontario provincial government
was overwhelmingly defeated and thrown out of ofnce by
the electorate.This time it couldn’t buy the election with
tax—cutpromises, although it
Its successfulopponents
did not promise taX cuts and instead emphasized restoring
services.

tried.

The neXt month, members of

the ruling federal party
chose Mr. Martin (seepp. 119—22)astheir new leader, mak—
ing him prime minister of the country. During his campaign
for that position, Mr. Martin spoke glowingly and often of
the necessity of a new deal for cities. He offered no details,
but he did invite severalbig—cityhealth officials to attend a
federal—provincialmeetingon healthandhospitalpolicy—the
first
time in Canadian history that urban voices have been
heard at a federal—provincialpolicy conference.

Most important,

in November, David Miller won a deci—
sive upset victory to become Toronto’s new mayor. He has
been an outstandingly courageous and intelligent city coun—
cillor and is expected to be a courageous and intelligent
mayor. So much damage has been done to the city and the
administration he inherits is such a dog’sbreakfast that he has
a daunting job, but he has enthusiastic citizen backing. (Dec—
laration of personalinterest:Mayor Miller’s transition advi—
sory team hastwo cochairman, of whom I am one; the other
is former Toronto mayor David Crombie; seep. 109.)

210 / NOTES AND COMMENTS

6. SELF-POLICING

SUBVERTED

For distinctions between commercial and governmental
ethics,andreasonsfor the differences,seemy SystemsofSur-
viral: A DialogueontheMoralFoundationsofCommerceandPol-
itics,(cited above).

An especially horrifying instance of delay in self—policingby
the College of Physicians and Surgeons in Toronto entailed
complaintsof healthworkersaslong agoas1991that oneDr.
Ronald Wilson andhistechnicianwereinsertingdirty needles
in patients’scalpsin their EEG clinic. Not until 1996did the
college begin to investigate the allegations, and by that time
some 14,000 patients had been exposed to hepatitis B and up
to 1,000 of
them had been infected. Wilson continued to
practice medicine, and patients continued to be exposed to
the potentially fatal liver infection, until November 12, 2002,
when he was finally found guilty of professional misconduct
and incompetence (“Doctor Stripped of His License,” Toronto
Star,Nov. 13, 2002, and “Faster Action Needed,” TorontoStar,
Nov. 14,2002).

At the hearing,an employeeof the clinic testinedthat he
contactedthe health ministry of the province to alert officials to
the dangerousconditions in the clinic and was told to inform
the College of Physiciansand Surgeonsbecausethat is the body
responsiblefor investigatingdoctors.At thecollege,hewastold
to call the provincial health ministry (“Warnings Were Given
YearsBefore Outbreak,” Bronto Star;Sept.2, 2002).

So many people, especially in important corporate positions,
had indulged in stock trading illegalities by 2002 that the US.
Securities and Exchange Commission wasunable to keep pace

NOTES AND COMMENTS / 211

with new casesof allegednaud, insider trading, and other ille—
galities.The US. Congresswas implicated by default; although
it passedlaws requiring rigorous oversight of auditing prac—
tices, it failed to appropriate sufficient funds for staff to carry
out this work. TheNew YorkTimes(Dec. 1, 2002) reported that
many of these shortfalls “are traceable to powerful corporate
interests on Wall Street and in the accounting profession that
continue both directly and through the help of well—placedal—
lies in Congress to exert enormous innuences on the rule—
makingprocess.”The Timesalsocitedweakleadershipin both
the White House and the SEC but reminded readersof simi—
lar crises surmounted in the past, particularly the Great De—
pression.This time,what seemsto beominouslydifferentisthe
participationof the accountingprofessionitself in theprolifer—
ationof businessdishonestyThis isquite asshockingaschurch
cover—upsof clergies’ crimes againstminors.

If

the belief by wrongdoers that “everybody

fortunately, in reality, everybody does not do wrong.

Acceptance of
doesit” hasbecomea greatenemyof effectiveself—policing.
But
everyonedid, our civilization would haveirretrievably col—
lapsed.Underlying the democraticideal of governmentby
consent of the governed is a consent more profound than eX—
ercise of the right to vote and obligation to respect the result;
it is the consent of the governed to behave themselves—not
so much to honor a socialcontractwith authority nor with
abstract society asto honor an understood social contract of
fair andjust behaviortowardone another.

“Corporate corruption casesareprobably inevitable during the
trough of
but this wave is different.
Some statisticsindicate that these fraud caseswere actually on

the economic cycle.

. .

212 / NOTES AND COMMENTS

. . .

the rise during the boom cycle,” TheNew York Timesreports.
“Many attribute the current changes
. . . to demographic and
economic forces.
While the rate of US. violent crimes has
been declining or nattening over the lastdecade,there hasbeen
a marked increasein accounting and corporate innactions, fed—
eral and stateofficials say.. . .
[W]hite—collarcrime seemsto be
the crime of choice of
the baby—boomgeneration.” (“Baby
Boomers Gone Bad: Fraud Epidemic as U.S. Ages, White—
Collar Crime Surges,” a New York Timesreport
in the Inter-
nationalHeraldTribuneof June4, 2002).

How the corruption looked from the inside, to those par—
ticipating in and benefiting from it, is revealedin a memoir by
Barbara Ley Tofner, Final Accounting:Ambition, Creed,and the
Fall of Arthur Andersen(New York: Broadway Books, 2003).
Ms. Tofnerbecamethe partner in chargeof ethics at the
Arthur Andersen consulting group after having taught corpo—
rate ethics at Harvard University and consulted asan ethics ex—
pert for many years.She relateshow she was seduced,in one
smallstepafteranother,by theAndersenorganization.In part,
the pay seduced her, but attraction and pressureto conform
wereatleastaspowerful:“Everyonefollowedthe rulesandthe
leader.When the rulesandleadersstoodfor decencyandin—
tegrity, the lock—stepculture was the key to competence and
respectability.But when the gamesand the leaderschanged di—
rection, the culture of conformity led to disaster.”Ms. TofHer
retainedenoughof her instinct for dangerto resignafterfour
yearswith the doomed company, but to her credit she stresses
how shewas taken in, rather than how she got out: “If
I got
caught up in much of the [company’s] culture, what can you
expect from young people entering an organization with no
ideawhetherwhat is happeningis normal or not?”

NOTES AND COMMENTS / 213

“Normality,” per se, is not an instructive ethical guide.
What we can expect from young people, fortunately, is that
some of
them rebel against dishonesty and injustice—even
when ill—chosenmentorstell them thesearenormal—purely
becausethey don’t want corruption to be normal. Ms. Tofner
is now an adjunct professorof managementat Columbia
University’s businessschool.

Growing Up Absurd by Paul Goodman (New York: Ran—

dom House, 1960), and the iconoclastic
Moore—such asthe recent Stupid WhiteMen: And OtherSorry
Excusesfor theStateof theNation (New York: HarperCollins,
2001)—are apropos reading.

books by Michael

Accounting puzzles: “Shifting Trash Cash Draws Fire/ City
Wants Disposal Costs in Capital Budget/It’s Puzzling and It
Requires Some Explaining,” YbrontoStar,Jan. 25, 2003.

Interface,

Inc., an Atlanta—based multinational,

reclaims its
nonbiodegradablecarpetbacking for recycling. This is accounted
for as a leasingand service—ratherthan a sales—contract.
Rahumathulla Marikkar, the proprietor of Toronto—basedInter—
faceCanada,is a fertile innovator of environmentally sustainable
practices,anda chartermemberof the GreenElectricityLead—
ers’ Coalition of Canada.

Natural Capital: CreatingtheNext IndustrialRevolution,by Paul
Hawken, Amory Lovins, and L. Hunter Lovins (Boston: Little,
Brown, 1999), addressesenvironmentally and economically
sustainableinnovations,Interface’samong them, and eluci—
dates the need for improved accounting practices relating to
the useof natural resources.The paperback edition (alsoLittle,
Brown, 2000)suffereda changein title, to NaturalCapitalism.

214 / NOTES AND COMMENTS

But the book is not about natural capitalism, but rather about
extremely sophisticated capitalism; and its core subject is in—
deed natural capital.A member of the book club to which I
belong planned to report on the book and buy copies for
other membersof the club, but he found the paperbackedi—
tion bewildering, considering what its title had led him to ex—
pect, and changed his mind. Too bad, because the book is
interesting and useful, with much that clarines direct and in—
direct costs, benents, and possibilities of natural resourcesas
drawnon sustainably.

7. UNWINDING

VICIOUS

SPIRALS

By the end of the 1990s,gentrincation was under way in what
had been even the most dilapidated and abused districts of
the poor, evicted or priced out by the
Manhattan. Again,
higher costs of renovating, were Victims. Affordable housing
couldhavebeenaddedasinnll in parkinglotsandemptylotsif
governmenthadbeenon itstoes,andif communitieshadbeen
self—conndentand vigorous in making demands, but they al—
most never were. Gentrincation benented neighborhoods, but
so much less than it could have if
the displaced people had
been recognized as community assetsworth retaining. Some—
times when they were gone their losswas mourned by gentri—
nerswho complainedthatthe communityinto which theyhad
bought had become lesslively and interesting.

For analysisof why slum—clearanceprojectsfailed ascommu—
to the “slums” they replaced,
nities and were often inferior
seemy book TheDeath andLy’eof GreatAmericanCities (New
York: Random House, 1961).

NOTES AND COMMENTS / 215

Figures on demolition of US. public housing by the mid—
1990s and for numbers of replacement units are from Re-
claimingPublicHousing:A HalfCehturyofStrugglein ThreePublic
Neighborhoods,by LawrenceJ.Vale (Cambridge, Mass: Harvard
UniversityPress,2002).Of the threereclamationexperiments
Valedescribes,onewassuccessful.In Toronto,planningis cur—
rently well advanced on a number of reclamation efforts that
emphasizeplanning cooperation with current residents,a
mixture of new uses, such asbusinesses and market—value res—
the areas
idences, and restoration of subtracted streetsto knit
physically, aswell aseconomically and socially, back into the
surrounding city.

In Ontario the total number of farms declined 11.5 percent
between 1996 and 2002. In Canada as a whole,
the decline
was 10.7 percent. In Peel, where Brampton is located, the de—
cline was 24 percent, and in York, where Vaughan is located,
16 percent. The acreagein farmland declined 2.7 percent in
Ontario, 0.8 percent in Canadaas a whole, 13 percent in
Peel, and 9 percent in York.

NedJacobs,who wasborn in 1950at the crestof the postwar
baby boom, has contributed the argument about retirement
and aging of his agegroup, and the possible opportunities this
opensfor sprawl densification. He hascollaborated with me in
writing this chapter.

In a master’sthesiscalled “Retrontting Suburbs: CaseStud—
ies of the Evolution of the Urban Fringe”
(Graduate Faculty
of the Department of Geography, University of British Co—
lumbia, 1997; www.telus.net/urbanlogic/retrofit.htm),
Mortensen points out how obsoletehave become the as—
sumptions behind single—familyzoning prevalent for suburban

Michael

216 / NOTES AND COMMENTS

residential tracts. For example, in Canada, between 1941 and
lone—parentfamilies rose nom 6.7
1991, the proportion of
percent to 13 percent, and of one—personhouseholdsfrom 7.1
percent to 23 percent. The proportion of two—parentnuclear
families had dropped nom 70 percent to 30.2 percent. In the
19605,a suburbanhousecostabout2.6 timesthe averagein—
come of a family with one wage—earninghead. In the 19905,
when 70 percentof nuclearfamilieshad two working heads,
the averagehouse cost more than six times their averagejoint
family income.

in further

Mortensen traces the kinds of adaptations, especially den—
sifications,that were madein Vancouver’sring of inner—city
suburbs(“streetcar suburbs”) built nom 1880 to 1920 and how
lessons from that experience were useful
retro—
fitting of streetcarsuburbsand could be useful in outlying
suburbs. To resume adaptations in the downtown peninsula
andsomeinner suburbs,Vancouvermodified prescriptivezon—
ing that had been mandated in its 1929 city plan by develop—
ing new discretionaryzoningcodes.Thesearenow in processof
being extended elsewhere in the city. Initial guidelines were
developedfrom attentionto successfulexamples,community
meetingswhere citizensexpresseddesiresand fears,and les—
sonsfrom Christopher Alexander’s instructions on incremen—
tal, organic planning (A Pattern Language: Towns,Building,
Construction[New York: Oxford University Press,1977]). The
intents of infill zoning are set forth as

(a) to encourage retention and renovation of existing
buildings, ensuring they maintain an architectural styleand
form consistentwith their original character; (b) [to] en—
sure that new development is compatible with the tradi—
tional characterof the surrounding streetand area;(c) [to]

NOTES AND COMMENTS / 217

ensureneighborliness; (d) [to] maintain high quality de—
sign; and (e) [to] maintain a range of choice in housing.

The most common form of residential adaptation had been
conversionof single—familyhousesinto duplexes,triplexes,
and quadriplexes.Almost ascommon had been infill or “coach
house” development, meaning addition of one or two build—
ings at the rear of a lot or, on corner properties, along the
side. By these means, dwelling densities have been raised to
twice or more of those in postwar suburbs.

Mortensen explains the educational, nnancial, bureaucratic,
and political changesthat made these outcomes possible and
forecastthe denserand more mixed and commercialneigh—
borhood centers for which residentsin some suburbsare now
asking.

Discretionary zoning seemsideal, provided that its intents
are practical and supported by a politically engaged citizenry.
But I have serious reservations about it becauseit could be a
disasterwhen administeredby corrupt municipal govern—
ment, or if planning is dominated by appeal bodies not re—
sponsiveto citizens. Plannerslike discretionary zoning because
of
the opportunities it affords them to refine and fine—tune
their visions. In Vancouver residents have raised complaints
about standardizedresults and have objected that citizens are
brought into the processat too late a stage.These reservations
raise the root question: Who has discretion?

Gramley’sexpectation that Greenspancan keep money grow—
ing on houses(TheNew YorkTimes,March 30, 2003)hasbeen
reinforcedby Greenspanhimself.On May 21, 2003,“he told a
panel of the Congressionaljoint economic committee that
‘the Fed is ready and able to do whatever is necessaryto guard

218 / NOTES AND COMMENTS

. . .

againsttheremotepossibilitythat aweakeconomywill trigger
a debilitating bout of falling prices.’ Greenspanassuredthe
. . .
committeethat evenwith the Fed’skey economicpolicy lever,
the federalfundsrate, at a 41—yearlow of 1.25 percent,the
central bank has other resourcesto innuence interest rates to
jump—starteconomic growth.
He said that in addition to
pushing the funds rate, which governs [interest on overnight]
loansbetweenbanks,closerto zero. . .
the Fedsimply‘could
begin buying longer—termTreasury securities to drive longer—
term interestrateslower’” (“GreenspanPromisesto FendOff
Denation,” TorontoStar, May 22, 2003). Greenspan then in—
voked the specterof the collapsedreal estatebubble inJapan as
a type of disasterto be avoided in the United Statesat all costs,
but the report of his remarks failed to point out that the sever—
ity of
the Japanesebubble’s collapse was probably owing to
Japanesebanks’ protracted indulgence of bad businessdebts
basedon innated speculativeassetsthat had lost value.

in value,” saysPam Woodall

“As safeas houses?Expect most people’s largest asset—their
homes—to fall
(The Economist,
Jan.forecastissuefor 2003). Ms. Woodall is the magazine’s
economicseditor.For afuller analysisof housingbubblesand
signs of
Ireland, Spain, Australia,
and the United States—seeMs. Woodall’s report “House of
Cards”

their fragility—in Britain,

(The Economist, May 31, 2003, pp. 3—16).

TheBoulevardBoole:History,Evolution, DesignofMultiway Boule-
vards,by Allan B. Jacobs,Elizabeth Macdonald, and Yodan
Rofe (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,2002), lives up fully to
its title and subtitle. The lead author, Allan B.Jacobs, professor
of city andregionalplanningat the University of California—
Berkeley and former director of SanFranciscoplanning, is not

NOTES AND COMMENTS / 219

a relativeof mine but a friend. An architectureandplanning
critic, Philip Langdon, has called the boulevard the “nagship
of urban streets” (New Urban News, Sept. 2002). Its great
virtue, when properly designed,is that it is an unlimited—access
street,affordingentranceand exit to adjoining grids at every
corner instead of at a few choke points. A boulevard would be
a stunning and functional replacement for the limited—access
expresswayat the southern perimeter of Toronto’s downtown,
for example (seep. 76). The quotation about lack of traffic and
safetydatais from p. 247 of the book, andis amplinedby ci—
tations, on p. 248, of the dogmatic texts relied on to teach stu—
dentsandguidepublic ofncials.

8. DARK AGE PATTERNS

Karen Armstrong,

Islam (cited above).

TheEssentialAgrarianReader:The Future of Culture, Community
and theLand, a collection of essaysedited by Norman Wirzba
(Lexington,Ky.: University Pressof Kentucky,2003).

xenophobic,

provincial,

to women,

This is a lament, but not exactly for the good old days of
agrarianism,which the editor knows weren’t necessarilyall
that good—unjust
claus—
trophobic.It is alament,rather,for what hasreplacedagrarian
life: insensitivity to the environment and even more ruthless
treatment of it; nenetic consumerism; decline of democratic
participation and community life, stability, and security. It is
alsoa lament that the possibilityof building the good things
of life on the baseof agrarianism is increasingly unlikely, and
a belief that this is tragic becausean agrarian vision is essen—
tial: “food is the most direct link we have between culture
and nature,” while “industrialism is the way of the machine,

220 / NOTES AND COMMENTS

technological

the way of
invention that premises economic
successon the exploitation of habitats and communities.”
Much that the book tells is insightful,
important, and sadin
the sensethat the crooked timber of humanity warps the
splendorsour biological and cultural gifts presentto us for
wise, humane, and ecologically respectful
lives. In various
contexts, the essayistsmourn that we do not
face honestly
who and what we are (creatures dependent on food and the
land), although they themselvesare reluctant to face honestly
that we ourselvesareproductsof natureandpart of nature.
The agrarian vision is a faith that, Wendell Berry writes,
may yet lead us into “the grace of the world,” where we will
find our true freedomandjoy. I placedmyself imaginatively
ten thousand yearsago and pretended that what I was reading
expressedthe revulsionof former foragerstoward the bond—
ageof peasantlife and the lossof adventure, and forager’scon—
viction that “hunting for food is the most directlink we have
between culture and nature,” while “the way of planting is
the way of the scytheandthe hoe, the way of technological
invention that premiseseconomicsuccesson the exploitation
of habitatsand communities.”They didn’t know wherethey
were headed, nor do we.

To Berry, the “industrial mind”

is the implacable enemy
from which no good cancome:It isinherentlyviolent; it im—
poverishes one place in order to be extravagant in another. It
causeswar after war. All of these chargescould havebeen lev—
eled by foragers against agriculturalists, and vice versa.Berry
seesagrarianismasrootedin sanctityandmystery,like the exis—
tenceof theworld itself.Most of the essayistsvalueagrarianism
asa religion, with religious values,and denigrate industrializa—
logosand take
tion as godless, without values. They reject

NOTES AND COMMENTS / 221

refuge in mythos(seeArmstrong, p. 17). So it must have been
with prehistoric hunters versus planters, each group with an
eternal goddesson its side, Diana versus Ceres.

However, these agrarian essays,Berry’s included, do em—
ploy logosto identify much that our culture neglects or does
badly,when it could do much better with what is alreadyat
hand. Of
the surprisingly few changes suggested,those that
seemto me to beboth practicalandpotentially mostinnuen—
tial areBrian Donahue’s proposal that every sprawling suburb
use part of
its empty open land for an educational farm;
and—for economic salvation of at least some family farms—
Fred Kirchenmann’s “relationship marketing” and synergistic
farms; Gene Logsdon’s and WesJackson’spasture farming and
grassfarming; and SusanWitt’s community land trustsand
local currencies.

The “Censorship Watch” column, Authors Guild Bulletin

(spring 2003), on loss of vital minutiae, hasthis to say:

What Are You Reading? Part One. [A] survey of 100 US.
libraries conducted in February 2002 revealedthat 85 had
been contactedby FBI agentsor police officials requesting
information about their patrons. Thanks to the USA Pa—
triot Act passedby Congress[in October 2001] the Justice
Department has authority to secretly obtain information
about the books you read or purchasefrom booksellers
simply by assertingthat the information is relevantto an an—
titerrorism investigation.Librariansandbooksellersarepro—
hibited from alerting patronsabout the subpoenas,thereby
making any legal recourse impossible. In response,Ver—
mont’s Bear Pond Books has erasedpurchaserecords for
members of its readers club.

222 / NOTES AND COMMENTS

What Are You Reading? Part Two. The Total Informa—
is the government’s latest
tion Awareness Program (TIA)
proposedstrategyin the fight againstterrorism. Vice Ad—
miral John Poindexter designedthe program, which uses
electronic “data mining”
to enable the government to
gatherand analyzepersonalinformation about every single
person in the United States.The systemmergescommer—
cial and governmental
information, which is then scruti—
nized by the Defense Department
terrorist
activities. In The New York TimesWilliam Safire detailed
what life would be like if the systemwere ever employed.
“Every purchaseyou make with a credit card, every mag—
azine subscription you buy and medical prescription you
fill, everyWeb site you visit and email you sendor receive,
every academicgradeyou receive,every bank deposityou
make,every trip you book and eventyou attend—all these
transactionsand communications will go into what the
DefenseDepartment describesasavirtual, centralizedgrand
database

the supersnoop’sdream.”

for patterns of

. . .

The American Civil Liberties Union has launched a

grassrootscampaignin opposition to the program.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Lunenfeld,

I am happily indebted for pieces of information,
insights, or
other valuable assistance to Toshiko Adilman, Mira Baraket,
Spencer Beebe and his staff, Carol Bier, Patricia Broms, James
I. Butzner, Dr. Decker Butzner, Dennis Cutajar, Ludwig
Dyke, Jon Ellis, Chris Full, Ken Greenberg, Riley Hender—
son,Jack Henshaw, Burgin Jacobs,ProfessorRichard C. Kee—
ley, Professor Marvin
Paul B. Manson, Mayor
Hazel McCallion and her planning staff, Michael Mortensen,
Dr. Fraser Mustard, Bhanu Negenthiren, Margaret Norman,
Mary Rowe, John Sewell, ShaneSimpson, ProfessorJamesL.
Spates,Judith Sternlight, Dominique Troiano, David Walsh,
and Margaret Zeidler. I am alsoindebted to Random House’s
copy chief, Benjamin Dreyer, and production editor Evan
Camfield and their staff of meticulous copy editors, who have
rescuedme nom ambiguities, prolixities, and inconsistencies.I
am gratefulalsofor the skill and diligenceof Aaron Milrad,
my lawyer and literary agent; Mary Ann Code, resourceful

224 / ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

researcherand fact checker; andVincent Pietropaulo, photog—
rapher—talented specialistswith whom it is apleasureto work.

Most

important,

this book has benented from the dedi—
cated care given it by six exceptionally nne editors. Three of
these were professionally responsible for assistingthe text and
me: David Ebershoff of Modern Library/Random House,
Anne Collins of Random House of Canada, and Jason Ep—
stein, indispensable editor of my sevenprevious books, who
did not abandon me in his retirement. Another, Max Allen,
who had previously edited a book about my work,
is also a
professional editor but volunteered his expertise as a friend.
The other two, NedJacobs andJimJacobs, I am proud to say
are homegrown. Readers would be as thankful as I am for
contributions of eachof thesesix if their brilliant questions
and polished suggestionscould gleam from the text literally,
asthey do for me figuratively.

INDEX

aboriginal cultures, 3, 9—11, 14,

171, 179, 180

33

abortion,
accountability, 125—26,135—36.

Alinsky, Saul, 197
American Civil Liberties Union,

222

American

Council

on Education,

Seealsonscalaccountability

48

accounting practices, 12, 132—33,

amnesia/forgetfulness, mass,3—4,

134, 135,136—38,158, 211,
212, 213

Afghanistan, 60
agrarian cultures,

219—21

161—68, 171,

agriculture, 145—47,199—200,

207, 215, 221

aid/grants,

104, 105, 109—10,

120—21,184, 206—7.Seealso
housing: assisted/subsidized;
subsidies

6—11,13,14,169,170—71,
173

analogies, 66
AppalachianMountains (North

Carolina), 168

Appian,192—93
Arabs, marsh, 15, 180—81
architects, self—regulationof,

126—28

20, 60

Arctic,
Armstrong,

Karen, 16—17,

Ainu, 11, 179—80
Alexander, Christopher, 216—17

164—67,181, 219,
220—21

226 /

INDEX

Arthur Andersen (accounting

firm), 134, 212

arts/ artists, 9, 173—74,203
Atkinson, JamesBlakely,178
Atwood, Margaret,
Augustus,
automobiles:aschief destroyerof
37—38,

60, 194
55, 173, 182, 191

community,

34, 40,

58—59, 185,

American
41—42; and commuting,
185; and corporate attacks on
public transportation, 38—41;
dependence
on, 42, 157, 185;
and drowsy drivers, 34, 185;
and economy,
193—94;and family income/
expenses, 34—36; and free
market, 38—39;and impact of
credentialing, 63; insurance for,
184785; andjobs, 58759; and
subjectsconsideredby federal
parliament of Canada, 207; and
suburbs, 34, 40, 41—42,90, 185;
in Toronto,
boulevards

108. See also tranic;

autonomy, 167

baby boomers, aging and

retirement of, 147—48,215

195

bankruptcies,133—34
Barnes, Henry,
Bausch & Lomb, 51, 191
Bay of Pigs,175
Bear Pond Books (Vermont), 221
Bedford, Paul, 196
behavior, destructive, 154, 156—57
Bello, Francis, 198
Berlin Wall, 67

Berridge, Joe, 207
Berry, Wendell, 220—21
biogeography,Diamond’sconcept,

11—20,21,161,162,179

birthrates, 29
Bloomberg, Michael, 122—23,208
Boards of Trade, 112, 113
Bombardier

(Canadian

corporation), 121

boulevards, 149—51,218—19
Brampton,

Canada, 90—96, 100,

101, 215

Brand, Stewart, 177
British North America Act (1867),

115, 120.Seealsoprovincial
of
governments;
Canada

constitution,

Buchan, Keith, 75
buildings: heights of, 154, 155;

permits for, 91, 9111

bureaucracy, 18, 104
Bush, George W, 60, 135
business schools, 135—36

Calgary,204—5
California, emergenceof

credentialing in, 61

Cambodia, 167—68
Canada: constitution

of, 115—16,

in, 48—49; economy

120, 122; credentialing and
education
of, 87—101, 116; family in, 216;
farms in, 215; federal budget
in, 206; gambling in, 185—86;
housing in, 184;jobs in, 87—100,
197; subjects considered by
federal parliament of, 207; taxes

in, 112—17;urbanization of,
115—16.Seealsospecinccity,level
ofgovemment, or topic

Canada Mortgage and Housing

Corporation, 183

Canadian Association of

Radiologists,206

Canadian Automobile Association,

184

CanadianCentre for Policy

Alternatives, 183

Canadian Health Coalition, 206
capital,137—38,213—14.Seealso

human capital
capitalcosts,145
capitalism, 213—14
Carleton University (Ontario),

194—95

cars. Seeautomobiles
Carthage,
58, 191—93
Catholicism, 58, 172—73.Seealso

priesthoods

Cato, 191
celebrities, glorification of, 136
Celts, 3
“CensorshipWatch” column,

221—22

Centers for Disease Control and

Prevention, U.S. (CDC), 82—83,
85786

centralization, 9
Chechnya, 105, 200
Chicago, Illinois, 81—87, 197, 208
China, 13—14,17—19,22—23, 180,

181, 195

Chong, Gordon, 203
cities, 12, 102, 103, 104, 118, 119,

INDEX / 227

rights, 60, 116

153, 177—78,200, 206—7,209.
Seealsomunicipal governments;
urban areas;specinccity
civic responsibility,122
civil
Civil War, American, 56
classicalcultures, 5, 6, 9, 10. See
alsoGreek civilization; Roman
Empire, Western
cod fishing, 20—21
codes and regulations,

145,
148—49,153—59.Seealso
zoning

Cold War, 57, 61
College of Physiciansand
210

Surgeons, Toronto,

College StudentAlliance, 190
colleges/universities:changesin,
62763; as community colleges,
49—50,190; cost of, 44, 50;
credentialing emerges in, 61—62;
credentialing asprimary business
of, 44—45,47; enrollments in,
46—47,49, 189, 204; faculty in,
49, 194, 195; asgrowth
industry,49; askey to jobs,
48—49;as “multiversity,” 61—62,
194; in 1960s, 61; public
funding for, 49, 50; remedial
work in, 159; and spirals of
decline, 158—59;student loans
for, 47; subcultures of, 47;
veterans in, 61—62. See also
credentialing; education

colonialism, 18, 55—56,58,

123—24,166—68

Columbus, Christopher, 19

228 /

INDEX

commercial crimes, 131—38,

210—14

commodity prices, 145
common good, 122
community: automobile/

of,

traffic
impact on, 36—38,41—42,59,
71; and Dark Age patterns, 169,
219, 220; and decline in public
transit, 39—40; destruction
36—38,41—42,59, 63, 71, 147,
157, 169; and family, 34—36;and
gentrincation, 214; and impact
of credentialing,63; importance
of, 34; loss of, asmalady of Dark
Ages, 38; aspillar of culture, 24;
in post—WorldWar 11years, 42;
and redundancy, 159; resources
of, 34—35;roads asmeans of
fostering, 149751; and staying
power, 37; and suburbs, 36—37
community colleges,49—50,190
34, 40, 185. See also
commuting,

drowsy drivers

companion cultures, 26
computer

science, enrollments

in,

46—47, 189
177

computers,
ConestogaCommunity College,

190

conformity, culture of, 212
Congress, U.S., 40, 58—59,85,

131

211

,

conquistadores, Spanish, 58
Constantine,
constitution, of Canada, 115—16,

9

120, 122
consumerism,

219

6, 67

Copernicus,
corporations: attacks on public
transit by, 38—41, 186—88;
bankruptcies of, 133—34;
corruption of, 210—12;and
Dark Age patterns, 170;
nnancialreporting by, 132—38;
insurance,

184—85

cover—ups,129—30,135
creativity/
167,172,

199, 213

innovation, 14, 21, 163,

credentialing: asattractive to
50—51; and

counterfeiters,
credential as collateral, 137;
disconnect between education
and, 50, 195; domination of
education by, 62; functions of,
45; asgrowth industry, 62;
impact of, 63; and income,
47—48;aslegacyof Great
Depression,

51—52; notes and

about, 189—95;
comments
origins of, 51—52,61; as
passport to consideration for
job, 45; of planners and zoners,
157; asprimary businessof
colleges/ universities,
and professional
examinations/
128; and science, 79; as
shortchangingeducation,47;
and social class,45; spiral of,
158—59;and technology, 47

certifications,

44—45, 47;

crimes, 24, 92, 129—38, 156, 212;

intractable, 23

Crombie, David, 109, 209
crusades, medieval, 58

INDEX / 229

cultural capital,137
cultural genocide,160
cultural purposes,55, 58—60
cultures: adaptation of, 10, 20, 22,

Daily Bread Food Bank, 183
Daley,Mayor Richard Jr., 208
Daley,Mayor Richard Sr.,208
Dark Ages: additions

in, 8—9;

in, 21—25;

in, 22, 25; as

174—76;amnesia/forgetfulness
about, 3—4, 6—11, 13, 14,
169—71,173; assimilation of,
5—6,172; barrier to develop—
ment of, 6; characteristics of
living,
5—6; companion,
26;
conquering of other,
11—16; corrections
of, 14,
deterioriation/decay
23—25, 170; documentation
about, 4—5;drift
failures, 14; false senseof
security about permanence of,
5; five pillars of, 24—25;as
forever changing, 6; fortress or
fundamentalistmentality in,
17—19;and getting used to
losses,23; hindsight about, 25,
170;andimpact of collapseon
other cultures, 23—24;jolts from
inside and outside, 20—22;
nuances in, 5—6;nuclear family
as ur—unit of, 27; reasons for
discarding, 4; reconstruction and
restoration of, 6; self—awareness
of, 174776; self—deceptionin,
175; stabilization of, 21—22,
24—25;transmission of, 5—6,
173; and unequal connicts,
11—21,161, 162, 179; and what
dooms losers?,20—21.Seealso
Dark Ages;specinccultureorpillar

Cutajar, Dennis,

92—93, 95

avoiding falling into, 171—72;
emergencefrom, 171;examples
of, 3; and fortress mentality,
17—18,19,22—23;and
hindsight, 25, 170; images of, 5;
impact of, 171;importanceof
understanding
about, 4—5; and
massamnesia/forgetfulness, 3—4,
6—9,10,11,13,14,169,
170—71,173; mosaics of past,
168; new, 167; patterns of, 25,
161—76,219—22;recovery from,
169; and search for lost
information, 10—11; and spirals
of decline, 139750, 164,
170—71,202,214—19;victims
of,169

social, as dogma, 69

Darwinism,
DeLanerolle,Thyagi, 190
democracy, 21, 163, 166, 175,

211,219

denial, plausible, 135—36,138
Dennis, Michael, 109
densification, 148—56,157, 215,

216,217

Denver, Colorado,
traffic in, 195
Depression. SeeGreat Depression
desertincation, of Fertile Cresent,

13—17,22

developmentcosts,137
Diamond, Jared: biogeography
concept of, 11—20,21, 161,
162,179

23o /

INDEX

dilapidation, pockets of, 139—40,

142, 143

diner (Brampton, Canada), 101
Diocletian, 181—82
disease, 8, 10, 12, 80, 179,

196—97,201—2.Seealsohealth
care; medicine; public health

increase in, 29

diversity, 36, 164
divorce,
Donahue, Brian, 221
“don’t ask, don’t tell,” 136
Doucet, Clive, 204—5
Doyle, Rodger, 189
drowsy drivers, 34, 185
drunken driving, 34
Duby, Georges, 178—79
Duerr, Al, 204—5

Easterly, W, 20879
ecology, 59—60,220. Seealso

environment

of scale, 157—58
economies
economy: and automobiles,

58—59, 185, 193—94;and cities,
178;andDark Age patterns,
161, 162; and decline of
cultures, 22; Greenspan’s
comments about, 217—18;and
taxes, 116; of Toronto/Greater
Toronto Area, 877101,
112,
117; and trade, 178

education: and adaptation of

cultures, 10; and after—school
courses, 203; benefits of, 44;
credentialing as dominating, 62;
credentialingasshortchanging,
47; andDark Age patterns,

164—66;disconnect between
credentialing and, 50, 195; and
functions of nuclear family, 35;
and impact of credentialing,63;
notes and comments about,
189—95;aspillar of culture, 24;
professions’ engagement in, 128;
and self—awarenessof cultures,
175; and spirals of decline,
of
158—60; and transmission
culture, 5. Seealsocolleges/
universities

en‘iciency, 157—60,166, 198
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 58—59,

193

elderly, heat stroke among, 81—87,

197

employment.Seejobs
End Poverty in California (EPIC),

52—53

engineering, asscience,

71—79

England, 30, 103, 148, 173,

196—97,200. SeealsoGreat
Britain

85, 133

Enlightenment, 6, 17, 55—56
Enron,
environment, 15—17,24, 56, 219
equilibrium, 181
ethics, 210714
Europe: and Dark Age patterns,

fragmentation

166—67;and Mesopotamia,
15—16;political
in, 19; poverty in, 178; and
reconstruction and restoration
of cultures, 6; revolution in, 9.
Seealsospecincnation

“everybody doesit” belief,

211

evidence,

in science, 66—67, 69,

75—76,79
69

evolution,
exiles, 26
extinctions,

161

family: adaptabilityof, 28; and

automobile culture, 42; in
Canada, 29; and community,
34—36;crisis in, 43; as
foundation of society, 29;
households take over functions
of, 29; and housing, 29—30;
of, 29—36,
income/expenses
182—83; notes and comments
about, 182—89;aspillar of
culture, 24; and Roman
Empire, 28; single—parent,32,
216. Seealsohouseholds; nuclear
family

farms/ farmers, 145—47,199—200,

INDEX / 231

food/food banks, 10, 12, 32,

100—101, 183, 184, 207

foraging societies, 161, 163, 220
Ford, Henry, 157—58
foreign aid, 123—24, 178, 208—9
forgetfulness. Seeamnesia/forget—

fulness, mass

Fort Yukon, 20, 181
fortress or fundamentalist

mentality, 17—19,22—23

57

Four Freedoms,
Four Horsemen of the
Apocalypse,8, 173

France, 3, 7, 103, 167—68,

178—79

56757, 59, 156

fraud, 129, 132, 133, 138, 211—12
free market, 38—39
Freedgood, Seymour, 208
freedom,
French Revolution, 56, 179
fruitful questions, 65—66,79
fuel economy, 193—94
fundamentalism, 6, 17—19,22—23,

215, 221

165

FederalBureauof Investigation

furniture, and import replacing,

(FBI), 186, 221

94—95

feedback, 21, 69, 175, 181, 194
Fennell, Susan, 95
Fertile Crescent. SeeMesopotamia
feudalism, 6, 7, 160, 171, 178779
financial reporting, 132—38,175
Firestone Tire, 41
fiscal accountability,

102, 103, 105,

110,112,115,118,
124

119,123,

Food and Hunger Action

Committee (Toronto), 183

Gagefamily, 95
gambling, 185—86
gelato maker, 1007101
gender, and income, 48
General Motors, 38—41,51, 108,

186,188,193,

194

genetics, 12
Geneva Conventions,
gentrification, 214
Germans/Germany,

60

63, 163, 164

232 /

INDEX

Gibbon, Edward, 22, 199
Gilbert, Richard, 207—8
globalwarming, 60
Goat, Carol, 190
Golden Report

for the Mayor’s
Homeless Action Task Force
(Toronto), 183

Goodman, Paul, 213
goods and services taxes, 119
Gordon, Robert, 190
government: examples of, 104; as
pillar of culture, 24; reform of,
209; “reinvented,” 113, 147,
189;relationshipamonglevels
of, 116, 204, 206—8,209; in
Roman Empire, 9; and self—
awarenessof cultures, 175; and
taxes, 104, 118—20.Seealso
aid/grants; nscal accountability;
subsidiarity; subsidies; type or
levelofgouemmem

Gramley, Lyle, 147—48,217—18
Great Britain,

15, 62—63, 113,

Greenspan, Alan, 147—48,217—18
gridlock, 195
Grimaldi, Michael, 193—94
Grubman,]ack,
Guelph University, 190
Gulf Wars, 180

191

Hadas, Moses, 182, 191, 193
Hall, James, 185
Hannibal, 191
Hawken, Paul, 213—14
health care, 35, 110, 113, 206. See

alsodisease;medicine; public
health

heatstroke,deathsin Chicago

causedby, 81—87, 197

Hebrew civilization, ancient,

169

highways/roads, 34, 39, 58759,

144,149—51,193

homelessness,30, 32, 33, 139,

145,147,183,184,200—201,
204, 206, 207

167—68,172—73,180—81.See
alsoEngland

Hong Kong,
households, 9, 10, 27—34,43,

104, 167

Great Depression, 51—54,57,
191,

58, 61,139,142,157,
211

Greater Toronto Area, 87—99,

1007101,

112, 207

Greater Toronto Services Board,

203

greed,70,113,136,142
Greek civilization, ancient, 6, 169,

173

Green Electricity Leaders’

Coalition of Canada, 213

216

housing: abandoned,

142, 143; and

abandonment/betrayalof
science, 97; adaptations of,
216717; affordable, 143, 144,
204, 206, 214; assisted/
subsidized, 33, 108—10,116,
141,143,
bubble, 148, 218; and
community resources,34;
demolition of public, 144, 215;
deterioration of, 139—40,142,

184, 215; price Of, as

in

in, 140;

139, 142;

143; and gentrincation, 214;
and Great Depression,
and income, 29—30,182—84,
216; mortgages for, 31, 32, 33,
in 1960s and
141, 144—45, 148;
1970s, 144; nonprofit, 184;
overcrowding
post—WorldWar II years, 141;
price/cost of, 29—32,144, 148,
182—83,216; and “redlining,”
143, 147; and rent control, 142,
147, 184; rental, 30, 32—33,108,
140, 141, 148—49, 184; shortages
of, 157; and suburbs, 145; and
taxes, 108—10, 142;
in Toronto,
108—10; and urban renewal, 144;
values of, 97; during World War
II, 139, 140, 142. Seealsocodes
and regulations; homelessness;
propertytaxes;slum clearance;
zoning

“How?” questions, 68
humanbeings:differentialdisease

resistance of, 179; preracial
anatomyof, 179—80

human capital, 61, 137, 163
human rights, 57, 166, 189
Humber College, 190
hunting societies, 20, 161, 163,

221

Hussein, Saddam, 180
Hwang, Stephen, 200
hypothesis, 66—69,79

185

IBM,
identity,
ideology,115

loss of, 167

INDEX / 233

image making, 136, 138
import

replacement, 88—95,98,

117, 197—99

income, 25, 29—34,47—48,

182—84,216

income taxes, 103—4
independence, 56, 59
Industrial Reorganization Act,

hearingson, 186

industrialism, 15, 22, 163, 165,

219—21

infill “coach house” development,

217

information: preservation of, 177;

search for lost, 10—11

ingenuity,

163, 164, 171, 199. See

alsocreativity/

innovation

innovation. Seecreativity/

innovation

Institutesof Technologyand

Applied Learning, 190

insurance corporations, 184—85
Interface, Inc., 213
International

Monetary

Fund, 113,

123, 167

Interstate Highway System, 58—59,

193

Iran—Contra scandal, 135
Iraq, 14, 15, 60,180—81
Ireland, 172773
Islam, 16—17,165

Jackson, Wes, 221
Jacobs, Allan B., 218—19
Jacobs,Jane: job of, during Great

Depression, 54
Jacobs, Ned, 215

234 /

INDEX

Japan, 11, 23, 63, 164, 171—72,

land use, 10, 145—47,151—52,

179—80,182, 218

154, 169

Jenner, Edward, 80—81,86
jitney—typevehicles,187—88,198
jobs: and abandonment of science,

for, 53;

for, 45; and

87—101,91”; and automobiles,
58—59; barter agreement
in Canada, 87—101, 91m, 197;
colleges/universitiesaskey to,
48—49;credentialing aspassport
to consideration
cultural purposes, 57, 60; and
ecology,59—60;and
government subsidies, 59; and
Great Depression, 51—54,58,
61; and guarantee of full
employmnt, 57, 58; and
Interstate Highway System,
58759; in post—WorldWar 11
years, 55; and War on
60; of women,
Terrorism,
during World War II, 55

33;

180

Jomonese,
juvenile delinquency,29

Kerr, Clark, 194
Kirchenmann, Fred, 221
Klinenberg, Eric, 83—87, 197
knowledge.Seeskillsand

knowledge

Korea, 55, 62, 180
Kosovo, 200
Kuhn, Thomas, 69—70,195
Kyoto Accord, 60

La Guardia, Fiorello, 38—39,

41

Langdon,Philip, 219
liberty, 56
libraries, 35, 221—22
Lincoln, Abraham, 176
logos,17, 19, 220, 221
Logsdon, Gene, 221
London, England, 103, 148,

196—97,200

Los Angeles, California, public

transit

in, 187

213—14

Lovins, Amory,
Lovins, L. Hunter,
LoyalistCollege of Applied

213—14

Arts and Technology,
190—91

Macdonald, Elizabeth, 218719
Main Streets, 149
Management and Training

Corporation Canada, 189

mandarinism, 195
Mandrou, Robert, 178—79
ManifestDestiny,56
Mankoff, Al, 186, 188
Rahumathulla,
Marikkar,
213
decline in, 29, 2971

marriage,
“marsh Arabs,” 15, 180—81
Marshall Plan, 55
Martin, Paul, 119—22,206, 209.
SeealsoBritish North America
Act

Marxism,
67, 69
mathematics, 16
medicine,

67, 130, 206, 210. See

alsodisease;health care

5, 158, 159, 160, 213

medieval Europe, 55, 58, 177—79
mentors,
mergers and takeovers,
Mesopotamia, 13—17,26
Metro

134

governments,

118—19, 207.

INDEX / 235

National City Lines,39
National Labor Relations Act,

57

69

Nazism,
neoconservatism,

113—15,

Seealsospecincgovernment

189

Mexican War, 56
middle class,25, 163
Middle East, 165, 178
migrations,
years, 42

in post—WorldWar 11

military, 9, 12, 175, 191
Miller, David, 209
Minoan civilization, 169
minutiae: indispensabilityof, 176;

loss of vital, 221—22
Mississauga,Canada, 89
modernization, 166—67.Seealso

postagrarian societies

monopolies, 21, 56
Montreal, Canada, 208
Moore, Michael, 213
Mortensen, Michael, 215—17
mortgages, 31—33, 141, 144—45,

148

Moses, Robert, 37—38,39, 41,

195

“multiplier effect,” 96
“multiversity,” 61—62,194
Mumford, Lewis, 178
municipal governments, 116—17,

118, 119, 120—23,204, 208,
209, 217. Seealsospecinc
municipality

Murray, Glen, 112—13
Mycenaean culture, 169
mythos, 17, 19, 221

New York City: gentrincationin,

214; housing in, 140—42;
neighborhood communitiesin,
37; public transportation in,
39—40, 187;
208; traffic in, 72—74,195

taxes in, 122—23,

Newfoundland, 20—21
Nixon, Richard M., 135
noise levels, 154
Norquist, John, 78
Nortel, 93—94
North Lawndale(Chicago,
83785, 168, 197

Illinois),

North York Harvest Food Bank,

183
nuclear

family, 27—28, 29, 35—36,

44, 216

odors, 154—55
oil, 15, 60
Olson, Steve, 179—80
Ontario, Canada, 50, 183—86,189,

201—2,206, 209, 215

Ontario Non—Profit Housing

Association,

183

opportunity, 105, 164
Organization for Economic

Cooperation and Development
(OECD), 105, 124
Oshawa, Canada, 108
Ottawa, Canada, 204—5

236 /

INDEX

Pagden,Anthony, 181
paradigms, 70, 78—79
parenting, 35
parents, doing better than, 59,

164

Pasteur, Louis, 68, 80
Pataki, George, 123
Patriot Act (2001), 221
peace, 164
Pearl Harbor, 39
Peel, Canada, 215
Perry,Matthew, 171
Phillips Petroleum,41
Phoenicians, 193
Pirenne, Henri, 102, 177—78
planning, 117, 157, 214, 215,

216—17

professions:criticismswithin,

or

126—28; examinations/certinca—
tions in, 128—29; harrassment
falseaccusationsagainst
members of, 130; public
reputation of, 129;self—policing
by, 24, 129—31,158; self—
regulation of, 125—29,131;
socialtrust in accountabilityof,
125—26;and spirals of decline,
158

taxes, 104, 116, 117, 118,

property
142

prophecy,25—26
provincial

governments,

110, 116,
118, 119, 206, 207—8,209. See
alsospeclntCanadianprovinces

plausible denial, 135—36,138
Poindexter, John, 222
police force, 130—31
pollution, 71, 154—55
post—World War 11 years, 42, 55,

62, 141, 217

Pruitt—Igoe housing project (St.

Louis, Missouri),

144

public health, 35, 79—87,201—2,

209. Seealsodisease;health care;
Jenner, Edward; medicine;
Pasteur, Louis; Snow, John

postagrarian

societies, 25, 163,

public transportation,34, 38—41,

164—66,167, 171

poverty, 8,14, 23, 113—14,178,

183. Seealsohomelessness

power: discrepancies in, among

cultures, 11—16;dumbed—down
use of, 105; and science, 70

Presidents Committee Cars

(PCCs), 41

priesthood, 12, 125—26,129,

158

prisons/jails,43, 188—89
production, 12, 21, 173, 191,

198—99

107—8,113, 118, 120—22,
186—88,198, 202—3

public—private partnerships (PPP

or P3), 113

question chain in science, 67768
Quinby, E.Jay, 188

racism, 12, 24
readingmaterial,government

inquiries about, 221—22

Reagan, Ronald, 135
recycling, 213

INDEX / 237

“redlining,” 143, 147
redundancy, 159—60,162
reform, social, 56—57
“reinvented”

government,

113,

160; taxes in, 102, 103; US. as
equated with, 174; wars waged
by, 9, 15, 191—93;wealth of,
199

147, 189

“relationshipmarketing,” 221
religion, 9, 10, 12, 129—30,178.

Seealsopriesthoods

remedial work, higher educational,

rooming houses, 110, 115
Roosevelt, Eleanor, 57
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 57
Roosevelt, Theodore, 56, 170
Rostovtzen, Michael, 199

159

6, 10, 16, 55

Renaissance,
rent controls, 142, 147, 184
residentialadaptations,216—17
resources, community,
ResponsibleGambling Council,

34—35

186

resumes, 50—51
revenue—sharing,119—20
roads. See boulevards;
highways/roads

Rofe, Yodan, 218—19
Roman Empire, Eastern, 9
Roman Empire, Western:

amnesia/forgetfulness about, 3,
7—9,174; arts in, 9, 173—74;
collapse of, 3, 9, 22, 28, 42,
182; cultural
purpose in, 55, 58;
Dark Age asfollowing collapse
of, 3, 7—8,174; and Dark Age
patterns, 171; decay of, 198799;
documentation about, 5; drift
in, 22; economy of, 22, 199;
emperors
families/ households in, 28;
government
migration of people,42;
reconstruction of, 6; spirals in,

in, 22, 181—82;

in, 9; and

housing in, 144

Safire, William, 222
St. Louis, Missouri,
salestaxes, 103—4
salvation of souls, 55, 58
SARS epidemic, 201—2
Saskatchewan, Canada, 202
science:abandonment/betrayalof,

from,

70—101;aim of, 65; analogies
in, 66; benefits of, 64; and
credentialism, 79; and Dark Age
patterns, 163, 166; dependence
on, 65; disconnections
69—70; engineering
as, 71—79;
evidence in, 66—67, 69, 75—76,
79; fascination of, 64—65;
feedback in, 69; and fortress or
fundamentalist mentality,
17;
fruitful questions in, 65—66,
79; and greed, 70; hard and soft,
21; human decisions aschanging,
21; hypothesis in, 66—68,79;
Islamic,16;andjobs/economy
example, 91, 9111;limitations of,
99; and medicine, 67; in
Mesopotamia, 17; methods of,
65—68;mistrust of, 64; notes
and comments about, 195—99;

238 /

INDEX

science (cont’d):

and paradigms,70; aspillar of
culture, 24; and power, 70; and
public healthexample,79—87;
chain in, 67—68; and
question
reconstruction and restoration
of cultures, 6; shortcomings of,
65; and spirals of decline, 158;
asstate of mind, 65, 69, 70, 79,
81, 86, 87, 158; and subjects
considered by federal parliament
of Canada, 207; surviving of
bad, 99—100;technology as
offspring of, 64, 68; and truth,
65, 70; and unequal connicts,
16; and worldviews, 70

Scipio, 192, 193
Scranton,Pennsylvania:housing

September 11, 2001, 201
Shapcott, Michael, 183
SheridanCollege Institute of
TechnologyandAdvanced
Learning, 93

Shiite Muslims, 180
signsandlighting, 154, 155
Sinclair, Upton, 52—53
Sioux, North Carolina, 168
skills and knowledge, 6, 10, 163,

164, 169, 172, 177. See also
credentialing; education

slum clearance, 141, 143—44,147,

214

smallpox, 80—81,86, 179
“smart growth,” 151, 152
Snell, Bradford, 186—87
Snow, John, 67, 80, 81, 86,

in, 140741;]acobs’
job in, 53—54

reporting

196797

secularism, 166
Securities and Exchange

Commission (SEC), 57, 135,
210—11

security, unlocked, 23, 182
self—awareness,cultural, 174—76
self—deception,cultural, 175
self—policing:delaysin, 129—30,

210; notes and comments
about, 210714; aspillar of
culture, 24; of professions, 24,
129—31,158; self—regulation
differentiated from, 126, 129;
subversion of, 125—38

self—regulation:of professions,
125—29,131;self—policing
differentiated from, 126, 129

socialcapital,137
social class,25, 45, 160, 163,

166—67

social contract, 211
socialutopias,69
songs, 173, 174
sovereignties,

104, 105, 110,

131

61

Soviet Union,
Spanish—AmericanWar, 56
special needs programs, 111
specialization,12
spin—doctoring, 136, 138, 201—2
spirals: beneficient, 175; and Dark
164, 168, 170—71;

Age patterns,
and lost cultures, 4; notes and
comments about, 214—19;and
self—awarenessof cultures, 174;

and taxes, 202; vicious, 139—50,
214—19

sportsutility vehicles,193
Sputnik, 61
stabilization, 21—22,24, 25
standardof living, 158
Standard Oil of California, 41
standardization,
staying power, 37
Stiglitz, Joseph E.
208—9
stock market, 46, 210—11
street scales,harmonious, 154
streetcars, 38—40, 41, 121, 186—87,

119, 198—99, 217

,

188, 203

subsidiarity, 102, 103, 105, 115,

119, 123, 124

subsidies, 21, 59, 207. Seealso

aid/ grants; housing:
assisted/ subsidized

suburbs: and automobile culture,

36—37; and Dark

34, 40, 41—42,90, 185;
boulevards in, 149—51;and
community,
169—70, 221;
Age patterns,
densincation of, 148—49,
151—52,153,154,156,
215,
216; and highways, 151; and
housing, 145;and impact of
credentialing, 63; lack of
communities
policies, 145—47,151—52;
means for improving, 152—60;
people who love, 151—52;in
post—WorldWar 11years,217;
public transportationin, 34,
198; and “smart growth,” 151,
152; sprawl of, 41—42,63, 145,

in, 63; and land

INDEX / 239

146—47,151, 152, 153, 157—58,
169—70,198,215,221;
subcultures of, 118; and taxes,
118; zoning in, 215—16

suicide bombers,

124

Tasmanians,
taxes: and agriculture,

13

199—200;

and bureaucracy, 104; and cities,
118, 119, 200; and colonies,
123—24; cuts in, 114—15; and
day care, 110; and disconnect
betweenpublic treasuriesand
local needs, 104—6;dumbed—
down use of, 102—24;
and economy,
116; and
government aid/ grants, 104,
105, 120—21;and health care,
110; and housing, 108710, 142;
and ideology, 115; notes and
comments about, 199—209;as
pillar of culture, 24; and public
health, 200, 201; and public
transportation,
107—8, 118,
120—22,202—3;and revenue—
sharing, 119—20;and schools,
110—15;and spirals of decline,
202; and standardization, 119;
and suburbs, 118; and urban
life/infrastructure,
115716,
117—18.Seealsonscal
accountability;subsidiarity;type
of tax or specinccity or levelof
government

technology, 3, 12, 13, 17—18,19,

47, 64, 65, 68—69,155, 165,
172, 207, 220

24o /

INDEX

190

203

57, 60, 124, 173, 222

terrorism,
Thatcherism, 113
theft, 23, 182. Seealsofraud
Thesiger, Wilfred, 180
Tibbits,]ohn,
Toffler, Barbara Ley, 212—13
Tonks, Alan, 207
Toronto Arts Council,
Toronto, Canada: automobiles in,
108; boulevards in, 219; ascity
in crisis, 106—10; deterioration
of, 119; economy of, 117, 183,
201—2;financialreporting in,
137; homelessnessin, 32,
200—201; housing in, 31, 32,
33, 108—10, 116, 183;
demands on city of, 117; and
levels of government, 208;
Miller asmayor of, 209;
planning in, 215; poverty in,
113—14,183; public health in,
200, 201—2;public transporta—
tion in, 107—8,121, 202—3;
schools in, 110—13;and spirals
of decline, 202; taxes in, 104—5,
106—7,110—13,117,119,
200—201, 206;
tourism in, 119,
201; trafnc in, 73—74,76—78,
196. SeealsoGreater Toronto
Area

increased

Toronto Disaster Relief

Committee, 200

Toronto

Transit Commission

(TTC), 202—3

Total Information Awareness

Program (TIA), 222

tourism,

119, 201—2

trade, 10, 18—19,23, 40, 56, 59,

102,178,181,191

traffic, 63, 71—79,95—96,150—51,

154,219

transparency, 103
TransportCanada,203
transportation. Seeautomobiles;

public transportation

trolley cars/companies.See

streetcars

truth, 65, 68, 70
Tufte, Edward R., 196—97
twentieth century,cultural

purposes in, 56—57

Un—American Activities

Committee (U.S. Congress),
53

unequal connicts, Diamond’s

concept about, 11—20,21, 161,
162, 179

57

United Nations,
United States: debt of, 198; as
exemplarymodel, 26; lack of
interest in others experiences
by, 98; Roman Empire equated
with, 174. Seealsospecinccity or
topic

universities. Seecolleges/

universities

University of Chicago,seminaron

fraud at, 135—36

University of Padua, 17
unlocked security, 23, 182
urban areas,34, 105, 115—16,

117—18,144,214, 215. Seealso
slum clearance;specinccity

INDEX / 241

“Use it or lose it,” 4, 13
Ustinov, Peter, 106

Vale, Lawrence J., 215
value—addedtaxes, 103—4,119
values, 60, 176
van der Rohe, Mies, 153
Vancouver, Canada, 98, 206, 216,

217

Vaughan, Canada, 89—90,91, 93,

100, 215

Veritas Software, 51
veterans, war, 61—62
Vietnam War, 176
Virgil, 55, 58, 173—74,191
voting, aswaste of effort,

122

Wagner, Robert E, 57
Walker, Michael A., 183
Wallace, Rick, on homeless

shelters, 200—201

War on Terrorism, 57, 60
wars, 9,10,15,163,

171,172,

191—93,220
Watergate, 135
Waterloo University, 190
wealth, 14, 25, 163, 164, 199. See

alsoincome

welfare, 32, 145

West Nile Virus, 202
Wheeler, Nik, 180—81
Whitney, Eli, 157—58
Wiley, T. T., 195
Wilfred Laurier University, 190
Wilson, Ronald, 210
Windsor, Canada, 104—5
Winnipeg, Canada, 112—13
Wirzba, Norman, 219—20
Witt, Susan, 221
33, 169

women,
Woodall, Pam, 218
Woodbridge, Canada, 89
“working poor,” 32
World Bank, 123, 167
World Health Organization, 201
World TradeOrganization,

167

World War
World War II, 55, 139, 140, 142,

I, 15, 163

157,163,164,

172

World’s Fair (1939), 39
worldviews, 17, 70
writing, 5, 169

Yayoi culture, 180
York, Canada, 89, 215

Zarella, Ronald L., 51, 191
Zimbabwe,

167

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

JANEJACOBs’sprevious books include TheDeath and
Life of GreatAmericanCities (1961), The Economyof
Cities(1969), TheQuestionofSeparatism(1980), Cities
and the Wealthof Nations (1984), Systemsof Survival
(1993), and The Nature of Economies(2000). Since
1968 she has lived in Toronto, where she has taken an
activerole in helping to shapethe City.

